Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
1
Clinical Decision Support Software
Guidance for Industry and 
Food and Drug Administration Staff
Document issued on January 29, 2026.
This document supersedes “Clinical Decision Support Software” issued on 
January 6, 2026.
For questions about this document regarding CDRH-regulated devices, contact the Digital Health 
Center of Excellence via email at DigitalHealth@fda.hhs.gov. For questions about this document 
regarding CBER-regulated devices, contact the Office of Communication, Outreach, and 
Development (OCOD) at 1-800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010, or by email at
industry.biologics@fda.hhs.gov. For questions about this document regarding CDER-regulated 
products, contact Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration at
druginfo@fda.hhs.gov. For questions about this document regarding combination products, 
contact the Office of Combination Products at combination@fda.gov.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration 
Center for Devices and Radiological Health 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Office of Combination Products in the Office of the Commissioner


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
2
Preface
Public Comment
You may submit electronic comments and suggestions at any time for Agency consideration to 
https://www.regulations.gov. Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Staff, Food 
and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Room 1061, (HFA-305), Rockville, MD 20852. 
Identify all comments with the docket number FDA-2017-D-6569. Comments may not be acted 
upon by the Agency until the document is next revised or updated.
Additional Copies
CDRH
Additional copies are available from the Internet. You may also send an email request to 
CDRH-Guidance@fda.hhs.gov to receive a copy of the guidance. Please include the document 
number GUI01400062 and complete title of the guidance in the request.
CBER
Additional copies are available from the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), 
Office of Communication, Outreach, and Development (OCOD), 10903 New Hampshire Ave., 
WO71, Room 3128, Silver Spring, MD 20903, or by calling 1-800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010, 
by email, industry.biologics@fda.hhs.gov, or from the Internet at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-
biologics/biologics-guidances.
CDER
Additional copies are available from the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Office of 
Communications, Division of Drug Information, 10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 
4th Floor, Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002, or by calling 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400, or by e- 
mail, druginfo@fda.hhs.gov, or from the Internet at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-
compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugs.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
3
Table of Contents
I. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 4
II. Background ................................................................................................................................. 5
III. Scope ........................................................................................................................................... 6
IV. Interpretation of Criteria in Section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act .......................................... 7
(1) 
Not intended to acquire, process, or analyze a medical image or a signal from an in 
vitro diagnostic device or a pattern or signal from a signal acquisition system ........................ 7
(2) 
Intended for the purpose of displaying, analyzing, or printing medical information 
about a patient or other medical information ............................................................................. 9
(3) 
Intended for the purpose of supporting or providing recommendations to an HCP 
about prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of a disease or condition ........................................ 10
(4) 
Intended for the purpose of enabling an HCP to independently review the basis for the 
recommendations that such software presents so that it is not the intent that the HCP rely 
primarily on any of such recommendations to make a clinical diagnosis or treatment 
decision regarding an individual patient .................................................................................. 14
V. Examples ................................................................................................................................... 16
A. 
Examples of Non-Device CDS Software Functions ........................................................... 16
B. 
Examples of Non-Device CDS Software Functions - Criterion 4 ...................................... 20
C. 
Examples of Device Software Functions ............................................................................ 21


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
4
Clinical Decision Support Software
Guidance for Industry and 
Food and Drug Administration Staff
I. Introduction 
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has long regulated software that meets the definition 
of a device in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act), 
including software that is intended to provide decision support for the diagnosis, treatment, 
prevention, cure, or mitigation of diseases or other conditions (often referred to as clinical 
decision support software). This guidance clarifies the scope of FDA’s oversight of clinical 
decision support software intended for health care professionals (HCPs) as devices.1 Not all 
clinical decision support software used in healthcare settings are devices and therefore subject to 
FDA oversight as a device.
FDA recognizes that the term “clinical decision support” or “CDS” is used broadly and in 
different ways, depending on the context.2 In the Food and Drug Administration Safety and 
Innovation Act (FDASIA) Health IT Report of 2014, CDS is described as a variety of tools 
including, but not limited to: computerized alerts and reminders for providers and patients; 
clinical guidelines; condition-specific order sets; focused patient data reports and summaries; 
documentation templates; diagnostic support; and contextually relevant reference information.3
For the purposes of this guidance, the term “Non-Device CDS” is used to refer to decision 
support software functions that do not meet the definition of device in section 201(h) of the 
FD&C Act. In accordance with section 201(h) of the FD&C Act, FDA uses criteria from section 
520(o) of the FD&C Act, which was added to the FD&C Act by the 21st Century Cures Act 
1 For the purposes of this guidance, the FDA uses the term HCP to mean an individual who is licensed, registered, or 
certified by a State, territory, or other governing body, to administer health care, including but not limited to, nurse 
practitioner, registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, clinical social worker, dentist, occupational therapist, pharmacist, 
physical therapist, physician, physician assistant, psychologist, respiratory therapist, speech-language pathologist, 
technologist, or any other practitioner or allied health professional.
2 For example, in one context CDS has been described as providing HCPs and patients with knowledge and person- 
specific information, intelligently filtered or presented at appropriate times, to enhance health and health care. See 
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, “What is Clinical Decision Support (CDS)?” at 
https://www.healthit.gov/topic/safety/clinical-decision-support
3 FDASIA Health IT Report, page 26, April 2014, available at 
https://web.archive.org/web/20150320102020/http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedi
calProductsandTobacco/CDRH/CDRHReports/UCM391521.pdf
This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or 
Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on 
FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the 
applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff 
or Office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
5
(Cures Act), to determine if a software function is Non-Device CDS (see Section III). Certain 
CDS software functions do not meet the criteria in section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act and are 
therefore device functions. Furthermore, some multiple function device products may include 
both Non-Device CDS software functions and device software functions (CDS or otherwise). In 
such situations, FDA would use the approach outlined in FDA’s guidance Multiple Function 
Device Products: Policy and Considerations,4 when assessing the safety and effectiveness of the 
device software function, consistent with section 520(o)(2) of the FD&C Act.
The purpose of this guidance is to describe FDA’s regulatory approach to CDS software 
functions. The Agency’s approach reflects changes to the FD&C Act made by the Cures Act, 
which amended section 520 and excludes certain software functions from the device definition. 
The focus of this guidance is to clarify the types of CDS software functions that are excluded 
from the definition of device by the criteria in section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act. This 
guidance further clarifies that FDA’s existing digital health policies continue to apply to software 
functions that meet the definition of a device, including those that are intended for use by 
patients or caregivers.5 For example, some decision support software functions may be identified 
in other guidance documents as software functions for which, based on our current understanding 
of the risks of these software functions, FDA does not intend at this time to enforce compliance 
with applicable device requirements of the FD&C Act, including, but not limited to, premarket 
clearance and approval requirements.
This guidance provides many examples of how FDA intends to consider different kinds of 
software functions, including Non-Device CDS software functions and device software 
functions.
In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. 
Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only 
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of 
the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but 
not required.
II.
Background 
Section 3060(a) of the Cures Act amended the FD&C Act to add section 520(o) of the FD&C 
Act, which excludes certain software functions from the definition of device in section 201(h) of 
the FD&C Act. Certain CDS software functions are excluded from the definition of device by 
section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act if the software functions meet all of the following four 
criteria:
4 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/multiple-function-device-
products-policy-and-considerations.
5 FDA intends to be consistent with existing policies, including the following documents: Policy for Device Software 
Functions and Mobile Medical Applications (https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-
documents/policy-device-software-functions-and-mobile-medical-applications), Software as a Medical Device (SaMD): 
Clinical Evaluation (https://www.imdrf.org/documents/software-medical-device-samd-clinical-evaluation), Medical 
Device Data Systems, Medical Image Storage Devices, and Medical Image Communications Devices 
(https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/medical-device-data-systems-medical-
image-storage-devices-and-medical-image-communications-devices), and General Wellness: Policy for Low Risk 
Devices (https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/general-wellness-policy-low-risk-
devices).


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
6
(1) not intended to acquire, process, or analyze a medical image or a signal from an in 
vitro diagnostic device or a pattern or signal from a signal acquisition system (section 
520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act);
(2) intended for the purpose of displaying, analyzing, or printing medical information 
about a patient or other medical information (such as peer-reviewed clinical studies and 
clinical practice guidelines) (section 520(o)(1)(E)(i) of the FD&C Act);
(3) intended for the purpose of supporting or providing recommendations to a health care 
professional about prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of a disease or condition (section 
520(o)(1)(E)(ii) of the FD&C Act); and
(4) intended for the purpose of enabling such health care professional to independently 
review the basis for such recommendations that such software presents so that it is not the 
intent that such health care professional rely primarily on any of such recommendations 
to make a clinical diagnosis or treatment decision regarding an individual patient (section 
520(o)(1)(E)(iii) of the FD&C Act).6
To explain FDA’s interpretation of section 520(o)(1)(E), in Section IV this guidance discusses 
each element of section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act.
III. Scope 
This guidance describes CDS software functions that do not meet the device definition (Non- 
Device CDS) based on the criteria in section 520(o) of the FD&C Act, which excludes certain 
software functions from the device definition, including certain CDS software functions intended 
for HCPs.
This guidance presents the Agency’s current thinking on which CDS software functions are 
excluded from the definition of device by section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act. The guidance 
does not address which other FDA statutory or regulatory requirements apply to device software 
functions, including which regulatory requirements may apply to a device software function that is 
part of a combination product, nor does it address labeling requirements for decision support 
software disseminated by or on behalf of a drug or biological product sponsor.
6 The Cures Act provides that a software function described in section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act will not be 
excluded from the device definition under section 201(h) if the software meets the criteria under section 513(a)(1)(C) 
of the FD&C Act or if the software is used in the manufacture and transfusion of blood and blood components to 
assist in the prevention of disease in humans (section 520(o)(4)(B) and (C) of the FD&C Act. In addition, the Cures 
Act provides that a software function will not be excluded if the Secretary of Health and Human Services issues a 
final order, after notification and a period for comment, that the software function would be reasonably likely to have 
serious adverse health consequences (section 520(o)(3) of the FD&C Act).


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
7
IV. Interpretation of Criteria in Section 520(o)(1)(E) of the 
FD&C Act 
The following sections explain FDA’s interpretation of each of the four criteria in section 
520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act. In order for a software function to be excluded from the device 
definition by this provision, it must meet all four criteria. Stated simply, these criteria describe 
the types of CDS that are not regulated as devices. Non-Device CDS software functions do not 
acquire, process, or analyze images, signals from an in vitro diagnostic device (IVD), or patterns 
or signals from a signal acquisition system (Criterion 1). Non-Device CDS software functions 
display, analyze, or print medical information (Criterion 2) in order to provide recommendations 
about a patient’s care to an HCP user (Criterion 3). Taken together, Criterion 1 and Criterion 2 
describe the types of data inputs used in devices (Criterion 1) and the types of data inputs used in 
Non-Device CDS (Criterion 2). Non-Device CDS software functions provide sufficient 
information about the basis for the recommendations to the HCP user, so that the user does not 
rely primarily on any of the recommendations to make a clinical decision about an individual 
patient (Criterion 4).
(1)Not intended to acquire, process, or analyze a medical image or 
a signal from an in vitro diagnostic device or a pattern or 
signal from a signal acquisition system 
Under section 520(o)(1)(E), software functions that are intended to acquire, process, or analyze a 
medical image, a signal from an IVD, or a pattern or signal from a signal acquisition system and 
are intended for a purpose identified in section 201(h) of the FD&C Act remain devices and 
therefore are subject to FDA oversight. In other words, if the type of data described in Criterion 
1 (i.e., medical image or a signal from an IVD or a pattern/signal from a signal acquisition 
system) is used as an input, then the software function remains a device within the meaning of 
section 201(h). Such products have been regulated as devices for many years.
We generally consider the term medical image to include those images generated by use of 
medical imaging systems (e.g., computed tomography (CT), x-ray, ultrasound, magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI)) to view any part(s) of the body or images acquired for a medical 
purpose (e.g., pathology, dermatology). Images that were not originally acquired for a medical 
purpose but are being processed or analyzed for a medical purpose are also considered medical 
images.
We generally consider the term signal to include those signals that typically require use of either:
·
An IVD, which can include an electrochemical or photometric response generated by an 
assay and instrument that may be further processed by software to generate a clinical test 
result; or


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
8
·
A signal acquisition system that measures a parameter from within, attached to, or external to 
the body for a medical purpose (e.g., through continuous, near-continuous, or otherwise 
streaming measurement) and often includes but is not limited to:
o
Use of sensors (e.g., electrocardiogram (ECG) leads) along with electronics and 
software function that is used for signal generation (e.g., ECG);
o
Collections of samples or specimens such as tissue, blood, or other fluids (e.g., 
conducting a pathological study using software such as digital pathology); or
o
Use of radiological imaging systems (e.g., computed tomography (CT)) and a 
software function for image generation.
FDA interprets the term pattern in this provision to refer to multiple, sequential, or repeated 
measurements of a signal or from a signal acquisition system. By contrast, discrete, episodic, or 
intermittent point-in-time physiological measurements (e.g., routine vital signs obtained at discrete 
clinical encounters) generally do not, by themselves, constitute a pattern. Examples of patterns 
include, but are not limited to:
·
For ECG, an electrical signal acquired from the body is processed to create an ECG 
waveform and QRS complex, which are considered patterns;
·
For Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), a fluorescent signal on tagged DNA is 
processed by modification or transformation into base pairs and sequences. Genetic 
sequences, including datasets of sequence variants that differ from reference sequences 
and datasets filtered to represent disease-associated variations (such as variant call format 
files or VCFs), are examples of patterns; or
·
For continuous glucose monitors (CGM), a photometric or electrochemical signal 
generated by an assay and instrument is processed to generate repeated glucose 
measurements over time, which is considered a pattern.
FDA considers software functions that assess or interpret the clinical implications or clinical 
relevance of a signal, pattern, or medical image to be software functions that do not meet 
Criterion 1 because they acquire, process, or analyze. Examples include:
·
Software functions that process or analyze a medical image, such as enhancement, 
manipulation, making measurements, identifying normal/abnormal structures, 
determining size/shape/location of a suspected nodule, or functions within computer 
aided diagnostics (CADx) or computer aided detection (CADe) systems, do not meet 
Criterion 1.
·
Software functions that process or analyze an ECG waveform or QRS complex, such as 
measuring repeated complexes, measuring variation from baseline, or detecting heart 
rate, arrhythmias, or structural abnormalities, do not meet Criterion 1.
·
Software functions that process or analyze the genetic sequence or patterns from an NGS 
analyzer to identify genetic variants or mutations or their clinical implications or 
relevance do not meet Criterion 1.
·
Software functions that process or analyze an electrochemical or photometric response 
generated by an assay and instrument to generate a clinical test result, such as 
determining a potassium level, do not meet Criterion 1.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
9
Although many signal acquisition systems are intended to monitor signals for medical purposes 
and, therefore, are considered medical devices, some are not. For example, activity monitors or 
other signal acquisition systems that measure physiological parameters that are not specifically 
intended or marketed for a purpose identified in the device definition are not medical devices.
We encourage manufacturers to engage with FDA if a signal acquisition system previously only 
considered for a medical purpose is intended to be used for a non-medical purpose. For example, 
software functions that use input from sensors and a signal acquisition system to measure 
physiological parameters for purposes of biometrics identification, such as retinal image analysis 
for secure access to a facility, are not devices within the meaning of section 201(h) of the FD&C 
Act.
(2)Intended for the purpose of displaying, analyzing, or printing 
medical information about a patient or other medical 
information 
Section 520(o)(1)(E)(i) of the FD&C Act describes software functions that are intended to 
display, analyze, or print7 medical information about a patient or other medical information (such 
as peer-reviewed clinical studies and clinical practice guidelines). In other words, if the type of 
data described in Criterion 2 (i.e., medical information) is used as an input, then the software 
function is not a device within the meaning of section 201(h) so long as it meets the other three 
criteria. FDA interprets Criterion 2 to include software functions that display, analyze, or print 
patient-specific information, such as demographic information, symptoms, certain test results, 
patient discharge summaries, and/or other medical information (such as clinical practice 
guidelines, peer-reviewed clinical studies, textbooks, approved drug or medical device labeling, 
and government agency recommendations). Taken together, Criterion 1 and Criterion 2 describe 
the types of data inputs used in devices (Criterion 1) and the types of data inputs used in Non- 
Device CDS (Criterion 2).
FDA interprets medical information about a patient to be the type of information used in, or that 
relates to, the clinical care of the patient, including patient-specific information. Such 
information is that which may generally be communicated between HCPs in a clinical 
conversation or between HCPs and patients in the context of a clinical decision. Whether 
particular information is commonly discussed in a clinical conversation is not, by itself, 
determinative of whether it is “medical information about a patient” under Criterion 2, provided 
the information’s relevance to patient care is supported by well-understood and accepted 
sources8 and can be appropriately understood in context. If Criterion 1 is met, data/results from 
devices (including IVD test(s)), when used in a manner consistent with the FDA-required 
labeling,9 are generally considered “medical information about a patient” within the meaning of 
7 Software functions that solely display or print medical information as described in section 520(o)(1)(C) or (D) of the 
FD&C Act are not considered CDS.
8 Generally, the kinds of information that are from “well-understood and accepted sources” are those that reflect 
knowledge and practices that are widely recognized and accepted within the medical or scientific community that are 
supported by scientific evidence, including peer-reviewed literature, clinical guidelines, or authoritative consensus 
documents. These can include information from sources such as medical textbooks or reference information developed 
by accredited medical institutions, government agencies, and professional organizations.
9 For the purposes of this guidance, “used in a manner consistent with the FDA-required labeling” is use consistent
with the FDA approved, cleared, or authorized uses of a product. The term “FDA-required labeling” as used in this 


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
10
Criterion 2. FDA interprets other medical information to include information such as peer-
reviewed clinical studies, clinical practice guidelines, and information that is similarly 
independently verified and validated as accurate, reliable, not omitting material information, and 
supported by evidence.
A single, discrete test or measurement result10 that is clinically meaningful (e.g., a blood glucose 
lab test result) is medical information, while a more continuous sampling of the same information 
(e.g., continuous glucose monitor readings) is a pattern/signal. As discussed above, a software 
function that is intended to acquire, process, or analyze a pattern/signal from a signal acquisition 
system fails Criterion 1 and remains a device (see Section IV (1)). FDA recognizes there is a 
continuum between a single sample and a continuous sample, and has included examples in 
Section V for reference.
The following are examples that describe types of medical information that can be displayed, 
analyzed, or printed about a patient:
·
The report from a radiology study (e.g., “a BIRADS category 4 lesion is present”) or 
summary information about the output of legally marketed CAD software (e.g., “twelve 
CAD annotations are present”).
·
An ECG report annotated by an HCP with a description of an abnormal heart rhythm 
(e.g., “the patient shows signs of Atrial Fibrillation”).
·
A blood pressure result (e.g., “120/80 mmHg”) from a legally marketed device.
·
A lab test result (e.g., “potassium level of 4.0 mmol/L or glucose level of 95 mg/dL”) in 
an electronic health record.
These software functions are not devices only if they also meet the other three criteria of section 
520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act.
(3)Intended for the purpose of supporting or providing 
recommendations to an HCP about prevention, diagnosis, or 
treatment of a disease or condition 
Section 520(o)(1)(E)(ii) describes software functions that are intended to support or provide 
recommendations to an HCP about prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of a disease or condition.
FDA interprets Criterion 3 to refer to software that provides condition-, disease-, and/or patient- 
specific recommendations to an HCP to enhance, inform and/or influence a health care decision 
but is not intended to replace or direct the HCP’s judgment. As discussed below, in cases where 
a software function provides a specific preventive, diagnostic or treatment output or directive, 
the software function fails Criterion 3 because it is not intended for the purpose of supporting or 
providing recommendations under section 520(o)(1)(E)(ii). If only one option is clinically 
guidance includes the labeling reviewed and approved by FDA as part of the medical product marketing application 
review process. For products not subject to premarket approval, but instead subject to premarket notification (510(k)) 
requirements or exempt from premarket review, the term FDA-required labeling includes the labeling that provides 
adequate directions for use and other information required to appear on the label or in labeling.
10 Software functions that process or analyze patterns or signals from chemical reactions generated by an assay and an 
instrument, such as an electrochemical or photometric response, to generate a clinical test result do not meet Criterion 1.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
11
appropriate and the software function otherwise meets all criteria under section 520(o)(1)(E), 
FDA intends to exercise enforcement discretion (meaning that FDA does not intend to enforce 
requirements under the FD&C Act) for such functions.
The following examples are intended to illustrate software functions that otherwise meet the 
criteria but provide only one recommendation that is clinically appropriate, as well as sub-
examples that would not be those for which FDA intends to exercise enforcement discretion.
·
A software function that predicts risk of future cardiovascular events for an HCP to 
consider based on a patient’s weight, current and historical smoking status, blood 
pressure, and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) IVD test results.
o
However, a software function with the same functionality, but also utilizes 
variant genomic data as an input that does not have established relevance to 
the diagnostic recommendation, would not fall under this example. Such a 
software function is a device software function that would remain the focus of 
FDA’s oversight.
o
However, a software function with the same functionality, but predicts risk of 
a cardiovascular event in the next 24 hours, would not fall under this 
example. Such a software function is a device software function that would 
remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.
·
A software function that creates a recommended treatment plan, including possible 
medication(s), for patients diagnosed with cognitive impairment for an HCP to consider 
based on the patient’s diagnosis related to cognitive impairment as well as potential 
comorbidities, age, sex, and patient preferences, and that should be reviewed, revised, 
and finalized by an HCP.
o
However, a software function with the same functionality, but also analyzes 
positron emission tomography (PET) scan images, would not fall under this 
example. Such a software function is a device software function that would 
remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.
·
A software function that recommends a specific FDA-approved antibiotic agent for an 
HCP to consider based on the patient’s symptoms, recent hospitalizations, and previous 
antibiotic exposure.
o
However, a software function with the same functionality, but also analyzes 
spectroscopy data to diagnose bacterial infections, would not fall under this 
example. Such a software function is a device software function that would 
remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.
·
A software function that analyzes a radiologist’s clinical findings of an image to generate 
a proposed summary of the clinical findings for a patient’s radiology or pathology report, 
including a specific diagnostic recommendation based on clinical guidelines that should 
be reviewed, revised, and finalized by an HCP.
o
However, a software function with the same functionality, but also analyzes 
the image to generate the clinical findings and/or make measurements, would 
not fall under this example. Such a software function is a device software 
function that would remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.
o
However, a software function with the same functionality, but utilizes 
information that cannot be verified and validated to be from well-understood 
and accepted sources to generate a specific diagnostic recommendation, 


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
12
would not fall under this example. Such a software function is a device 
software function that would remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.
·
A software function that provides an HCP with a differential diagnosis based on a 
patient’s symptoms, vital signs, and laboratory values, and that, depending on the 
clinical context, may present either multiple diagnostic considerations or a single 
clinically appropriate diagnostic recommendation when alternative diagnoses are 
highly improbable. The output is intended to support clinical reasoning and to be 
reviewed, revised, and finalized by the HCP.  
o
However, a software function that establishes a definitive diagnosis based 
on analysis of medical images, waveform data, or other signal-level inputs 
would not fall under this example. Such a software function is a device 
software function that would remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.  
·
A software function that classifies patients with chronic low back pain into a single 
recommended appropriate clinical care pathway (e.g., conservative management or 
referral to a surgical spine specialist) based on patient history, symptom duration, and 
documented clinical findings, where the recommendation is intended to be reviewed 
and acted upon by an HCP.  
o
However, a software function that provides care pathway 
recommendations for patients with acute back pain due to trauma or other 
emergent conditions, where immediate clinical intervention may be 
required, would not fall under this example. Such a software function is a 
device software function that would remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.  
·
A software function that estimates 90-day and 1-year postoperative mortality and 
complication risk following lung transplantation based on patient-specific clinical 
characteristics and published clinical evidence, where the output is intended to 
support pre-transplant planning and shared decision-making and is reviewed by an 
HCP.  
o
However, a software function that predicts intraoperative or in-hospital 
mortality based on near real-time physiologic measurements and is 
intended to guide immediate escalation of care would not fall under this 
example. Such a software function is a device software function that would 
remain the focus of FDA’s oversight.
o
However, a software function that incorporates medical images, genomic 
data, or other data sources that are not well-understood and accepted for 
the stated clinical use would not fall under this example. Such a software 
function is a device software function that would remain the focus of 
FDA’s oversight.
The following are examples of software functions that meet Criterion 3, because they are 
intended for the purpose of supporting or providing recommendations to an HCP about 
prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of a disease or condition. Examples of Non-Device CDS 
software functions include software functions that provide:
·
Evidence-based clinician order sets for an HCP to choose from, tailored for a particular 
condition, disease, or clinician preference;
·
Matching patient-specific medical information from records or reports to reference 
information (e.g., clinical guidelines);
·
Contextually relevant reference information about a disease or condition;


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
13
·
Drug-drug interaction and drug-allergy contraindication notifications to avert adverse 
drug events;
·
Drug formulary guidelines;
·
Duplicate testing or prescription product prevention notifications (e.g., medication 
reconciliations and test reconciliations);
·
Reminders for preventive care or clinician’s orders; and
·
Patient data reports and summaries (e.g., discharge papers).
FDA interprets Criterion 3 to describe software that:
a) Provides condition-, disease-, and/or patient-specific information and options to an HCP 
to enhance, inform and/or influence a health care decision;
b) Does not provide a specific preventive, diagnostic, or treatment output or directive; and
c) Is not intended to replace or direct the HCP’s judgment.
Such software presents recommendations based on an analysis of patient-specific information to 
an HCP, who may then incorporate this information into their decision-making about the care of a 
patient, along with other information and factors of which the HCP is aware. For example, a 
software function that analyzes patient-specific medical information (e.g., atrial fibrillation (AF) 
diagnosis from Holter report) and provides the HCP with a prioritized list of treatment options for 
AF would meet Criterion 3.
Software functions that provide the following outputs may also be considered “supporting or 
providing recommendations to an HCP” and would meet Criterion 3, as long as they were not 
intended to replace or direct the HCP’s judgment:
1. List of preventive, diagnostic or treatment options;
2. Prioritized list of preventive, diagnostic or treatment options; or
3. List of follow-up or next-step options for consideration (e.g., after a physician office 
visit, hospitalization, procedure).
The software functions described in this section as satisfying Criterion 3 are not devices only if 
they also meet the other three criteria of section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act.
Software functions that support or provide recommendations to patients or caregivers – not 
HCPs – meet the definition of a device. FDA understands the importance of CDS for patients 
and caregivers and supports increased access to innovative, safe, and effective CDS for non-HCP 
users. FDA intends to be consistent with existing policies (including the following documents: 
Policy for Device Software Functions and Mobile Medical Applications,11 Software as a 
Medical Device (SaMD): Clinical Evaluation,12 Medical Device Data Systems, Medical Image 
Storage Devices, and Medical Image Communications Devices,13 and General Wellness: Policy 
for Low Risk Devices)14 in the regulation of CDS intended for non-HCPs. Further, FDA remains 
11 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/policy-device-software-
functions-and-mobile-medical-applications
12 Available at https://www.imdrf.org/documents/software-medical-device-samd-clinical-evaluation
13 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/medical-device-data-
systems-medical-image-storage-devices-and-medical-image-communications-devices
14 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/general-wellness- policy-
low-risk-devices


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
14
committed to providing transparency and will update our existing policies, as appropriate, with 
additional examples as CDS for non-HCPs continues to evolve.
For additional information regarding risk categorization and considerations that may apply to 
certain software functions, please see the International Medical Device Regulators Forum 
(IMDRF) document Software as a Medical Device: Possible Framework for Risk Categorization
and Corresponding Considerations.15
(4)Intended for the purpose of enabling an HCP to independently 
review the basis for the recommendations that such software 
presents so that it is not the intent that the HCP rely primarily 
on any of such recommendations to make a clinical diagnosis 
or treatment decision regarding an individual patient 
In order to be excluded from the definition of a device under section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C 
Act, the software function must be intended to enable HCPs to independently review the basis 
for the recommendations presented by the software so that they do not rely primarily on such 
recommendations, but rather on their own judgment, to make clinical decisions for individual 
patients. 
 
The software and labeling recommendations in this section are based on FDA’s experience 
evaluating device CDS and software functions that are Non-Device CDS. However, sponsors 
may use alternative approaches so long as their approach enables an HCP “to independently 
review the basis for such recommendations” (section 520(o)(1)(E)(iii) (Criterion 4). In order to 
satisfy Criterion 4, FDA recommends that:
a) The software or labeling include the purpose or intended use of the product, including the 
intended HCP user and intended patient population. FDA does not consider software 
functions intended for a critical, time-sensitive task or decision to meet Criterion 4, 
because an HCP is unlikely to have sufficient time to independently review the basis of 
the recommendations. (As described in section IV (3), software functions that are 
intended to replace or direct the HCP’s judgment would not meet Criterion 3.)
b) The software or labeling identify the required input medical information, with plain 
language instructions on how the inputs should be obtained, their relevance, and data 
quality requirements.
c) The software or labeling provide a plain language description of the underlying algorithm 
development and validation that forms the basis for the CDS implementation, sufficient 
for the intended HCP user to understand the basis of the recommendation, including:
i.
A summary of the general approach relied upon to provide the recommendations 
(e.g., meta-analysis of clinical studies, expert panel, statistical modeling, AI/ML 
techniques), at a level of detail appropriate for the intended user and use 
environment, which could include, for example, the logic or methods relied upon;
ii.
A description of the data relied upon so that an HCP can assess whether the data is 
representative of their patient population (e.g., relevant sub-groups, disease 
conditions, collection sites, sex, ethnicity) and assess if best practices were 
15 Available at http://www.imdrf.org/docs/imdrf/final/technical/imdrf-tech-140918-samd-framework-risk-
categorization-141013.pdf  


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
15
followed (e.g., independent development and validation datasets); and
iii.
A description of the results from clinical studies conducted to validate the 
algorithm/recommendations so that an HCP can assess the potential performance 
and limitations when applied to their patients (e.g., sub-populations with untested 
or highly variable algorithm performance).
d) The software output provides the HCP user with relevant patient-specific information and 
other knowns/unknowns for consideration (e.g., missing, corrupted, or unexpected input 
data values) that will enable the HCP to independently review the basis for the 
recommendations and apply their judgment when making the final decision.
In order to describe the basis for the recommendations, regardless of the complexity of the 
software and whether or not it is proprietary, the software or associated labeling should provide 
adequate background information about underlying sources in plain language. Information that 
enables an HCP to independently review the basis of provided recommendations is presented in a 
manner that promotes usability and avoids information overload, including prioritizing the most 
decision-relevant information and making additional detail available as appropriate.
The software output or labeling should be identified and available to the intended user (e.g., 
clinical practice guidelines with the date or version, published literature, or information that has 
been communicated by the CDS developer to the intended user) and understandable by the 
intended user (e.g., data points whose meaning is well understood by the intended user). In 
order to enable independent evaluation of its basis, the recommendation should be based on 
information whose meaning could be expected to be independently understood by the intended 
HCP user (e.g., the inputs used to generate the recommendations are identified, the 
recommendations are based on inputs that do not omit material information, and the quality and 
robustness of the datasets or clinical studies are described). FDA believes that relevant patient-
specific information can also help the HCPs understand the basis of the recommendations. 
Beyond the input medical information relied upon, being able to clearly understand how the 
logic was applied for the patient (e.g., matching of patient-level data to criteria in practice 
guidelines, comparison to a reference/normal database, development and use of a prioritized 
schema for recommendation generation) will aid an HCP in understanding the basis of the 
recommendations. Providing the recommendations in the context of what is known/unknown 
for an individual patient may give HCPs an opportunity to assess the strength/limitations of the 
CDS software function recommendations when applying their judgment to the final decision.
In some cases, developers may need to perform usability testing to evaluate if their 
implementation meets Criterion 4.
Additionally, FDA considers the (a) level of software automation and (b) time-critical nature of 
the HCP’s decision making when determining whether a software function allows an HCP to 
independently review the basis for the recommendations presented by the software so that they 
do not rely primarily on such recommendations.
Automation bias is the propensity of humans to over-rely on a suggestion from an automated 
system. In the context of CDS, automation bias can result in errors of commission (following 
incorrect advice) or omission (failing to act because of not being prompted to do so). In 
situations that require urgent action, automation bias increases because there is not sufficient


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
16
time for the user to adequately consider other information.16 This understanding of automation 
bias informs FDA’s interpretation that Non-Device CDS software functions allow an HCP to 
independently review the basis for the recommendations presented by the software so that 
they do not rely primarily on such recommendations.
V.
Examples 
The following sections describe examples of software functions that are Non-Device CDS 
software functions (V.A and V.B) and examples of software functions that remain devices (V.C). 
This guidance, and these examples, are not intended to include all regulatory requirements for 
devices that may or may not apply to an individual software function. For additional information 
about applicable regulatory requirements, please see complementary, existing digital health 
policies described in the following: Policy for Device Software Functions and Mobile Medical 
Applications,17 Software as a Medical Device (SaMD): Clinical Evaluation,18 Medical Device 
Data Systems, Medical Image Storage Devices, and Medical Image Communications Devices,19
and General Wellness: Policy for Low Risk Devices.20
A.Examples of Non-Device CDS Software Functions 
The following examples are intended to illustrate FDA’s interpretation of the first three criteria 
in section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act: software functions considered Non-Device CDS 
provided that they also meet Criterion 4.21 (For examples focused on interpretation of Criterion 
4, see section V.B below.)
Examples of non-device CDS software functions include software functions that provide:
1. Evidence-based clinician order sets for an HCP to choose from, tailored for a particular 
condition, disease, or clinician preference:
a.
Software function that provides groupings of standard order sets, consistent with 
clinical guidelines, for patient admission to critical care.
b. Software function that provides a list of diagnostic and treatment order options to 
an HCP based on clinical guidelines for the care of adult patients presenting with 
pneumonia symptoms.
2. Matching patient-specific medical information from records or reports to reference 
information (e.g., clinical guidelines) that is routinely used in clinical practice:
16 M.L. Cummings. Automation Bias in Intelligent Time Critical Decision Support Systems. American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics 1st Intelligent Systems Technical Conference, Vol. 2, 2004, pp. 557-62.
17 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/policy-device-software-
functions-and-mobile-medical-applications
18 Available at https://www.imdrf.org/documents/software-medical-device-samd-clinical-evaluation
19 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/medical-device-data-
systems-medical-image-storage-devices-and-medical-image-communications-devices
20 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/general-wellness- policy-
low-risk-devices
21 To be a non-device CDS software function, the software function would also need to be explained to the HCP user 
such that the user can independently review the basis for the recommendations presented by the software, and the user 
does not rely primarily on the outputs to make a clinical decision about an individual patient (Criterion 4).


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
17
a.
Software function that matches patient-specific medical information (e.g., 
diagnosis, treatments, allergies, signs or symptoms) to reference information 
routinely uses in clinical practice (e.g., practice guidelines) to facilitate 
assessments of specific patients. For example, a software function that uses a 
patient’s diagnosis and other medical information to provide an HCP with current 
practice treatment guidelines for common illnesses or conditions such as 
influenza, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia.
b. Software function that matches patient-specific medical information to peer- 
reviewed literature publications on related topics.
3. Contextually relevant reference information about a disease or condition:
a.
Software function that provides HCPs with recommendations on the use of a 
prescription drug22 for a disease (as indicated in the patient’s medical record) that 
are consistent with the current version of the drug’s FDA-approved labeling.23,24
b. Software function that provides HCPs with available treatment options, including 
drug, device, surgical and/or lifestyle changes for heart failure patients based on 
their disease stage and clinical guidelines.
4. Drug-drug interaction and drug-allergy contraindication notifications to avert adverse drug 
reactions:
a.
Software function that identifies drug-drug interactions and drug-allergy 
contraindications, based on the current version of FDA-approved drug or device 
labeling or other up-to-date and peer-reviewed sources and patient-specific 
information, to attempt to prevent adverse drug reactions.
b. Software function that enables an HCP to enter multiple drug names and provides 
information regarding known drug-drug interactions.
c.
Software function that identifies drug-disease interactions and contraindications, 
such as notifying an HCP that a patient with asthma should not be prescribed a 
non-selective beta-blocking drug.
5. Drug formulary guidelines:
a.
Software function that provides HCPs with a list of medications on a formulary 
for a given disease or condition.
b. Software function that provides alerts to HCPs regarding changes in a formulary 
and recommends alternatives.
22 Information relied upon by the software should be kept up-to-date while prominently displaying the source of the 
information (e.g., FDA-approved labeling), and provide options to users to obtain up-to-date information. (For example, 
software that provides alerts for potential drug-drug interactions should provide a link directly to a trusted and up-to-
date source for that information (e.g., DailyMed for drug labeling)).
23 Includes prescribing information (also referred to as package insert or physician labeling); patient labeling, including 
patient package inserts and Medication Guides; the product’s immediate container label; outer container; the outside 
package; and other written, printed, or graphic information that accompanies the product.
24 See FDA guidance entitled “Medical Product Communications that are Consistent with FDA-Required Labeling,” 
available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/medical-product-
communications-are-consistent-fda-required-labeling-questions-and-answers


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
18
6. Duplicate testing or medication error prevention notifications (e.g., medication 
reconciliations and test reconciliations):
a.
Software function that provides an alert to notify an HCP of redundant test orders 
and advise discontinuation of the order.
b. Software function that flags patient results for an HCP based on specific clinical 
parameters (e.g., out of range test results where the reference ranges are 
predetermined by the lab or HCP) in response to a medication order. Example:
■
Software function that flags low potassium and/or magnesium levels in a 
patient in response to a prescription for digoxin.
7. Reminders for preventive care or clinician’s orders:
a.
Software function that provides an HCP with reminders for preventive care (e.g., 
breast cancer screening or immunizations) for a patient based on practice 
guidelines using medical information in the patient’s medical record.
b. Software function that provides an HCP with reminders for orders for 
Hemoglobin A1C tests for diabetic patients using patient-specific medical 
information from the medical record (e.g., the patient’s diagnosis, date of prior 
Hemoglobin A1C test) based on practice guidelines.
8. Patient data reports and summaries (e.g., discharge papers):
a.
Software function that uses medical information from the patient’s medical 
records to provide an HCP with recommended assessments prior to discharge, 
such as a pain assessment.
b. Software function that aggregates possible post-operative care instructions, 
medication needs, and follow-up instructions to assist an HCP in assembling 
discharge papers for a patient.
9. List of preventive, diagnostic or treatment options:
a.
Software function that provides a list of appropriate cholesterol-lowering drugs to 
HCPs to consider based on a patient’s cholesterol levels and demographics found 
in the electronic health record (EHR).
b. Software function that analyzes medical information on a patient’s asthma 
diagnosis and demographics from the patient’s medical record and provides an 
HCP with a list of FDA-approved treatment options for asthma.
c.
Software function that provides to an HCP a list of FDA-approved 
chemotherapeutic agents for a cancer type identified through analysis of medical 
information on the patient’s diagnosis and pathologist confirmed biopsy result.
d. Software function that analyzes family history, prior mammogram results, and 
BRCA1 status from the medical record and recommends that an HCP consider 
increased mammography frequency or supplemental breast ultrasound for the 
patient.
e.
Software function that enables an HCP to input the specific mutation results of an 
FDA-authorized Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Mutation (EGFR) test for a 
patient with non-small cell lung cancer (the same clinical condition for which the 
FDA-authorized EGFR test was clinically validated) and identifies FDA-approved 
treatments for non-small cell lung cancer indicated for use with the FDA- 
authorized EGFR test.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
19
10. Prioritized list of preventive, diagnostic or treatment options:
a.
Software function that analyzes the type of arthritis diagnosis in the patient’s 
medical record and identifies prioritized treatment options available for that 
condition.
b.
Software function that analyzes patient-specific symptoms to provide a prioritized 
list of diagnostic tests for the HCP to consider.
c.
Software intended for HCPs that analyzes patient-specific medical information to 
determine which over-the-counter (OTC) allergy drug class is likely to be most 
effective in alleviating the patient’s seasonal allergies and provides a list of 
available medications in that drug class.
d.
Software function that analyzes information on a patient’s glaucoma diagnosis in 
the patient’s medical record and provides the HCP with a list of prioritized 
treatment options to consider for that patient.
11. List of follow-up or next-step options for consideration (e.g., after a physician office visit, 
hospitalization, procedure):
a.
Software function that analyzes a patient’s age, sex, and radiologist’s report for 
findings of low bone density and micro cervical fractures in order to provide an 
HCP with a list of follow-up options for consideration, such as performance of 
periodic bone-densitometry scans, nonpharmacological management (e.g., weight- 
bearing exercise), or referral of the patient to a specialist.
b.
Software function that tracks and analyzes a chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) patient’s age and average number of steps walked per day in 
order to provide a list of follow-up options for the HCP to consider (e.g., office 
visit, chest CT, spirometry) to evaluate disease progression.
c.
Software function that analyzes blood glucose laboratory test results and pre- 
diabetes diagnosis from a patient’s medical record and provides an HCP with a 
list of next-step options to consider, such as more frequent office visits or referral 
to a specialist.
d. Software function that interprets daily results of a basic metabolic panel for a 
hospitalized patient and recommends several options for IV fluids that may be 
beneficial to ensure proper hydration and to prevent acidosis. In some cases, this 
software function may also provide recommendations for potential follow-up 
testing options.
e.
Software function that inputs information about a patient’s cancer progression and 
treatment history and other medical information from a patient’s medical record 
and recommends, in addition to prioritized treatments, that the healthcare 
practitioner also consider one or more legally marketed companion diagnostic 
tests.
12. Software function that identifies to an HCP that a patient, consistent with the current version of 
FDA-approved drug labeling, is within a specific indicated population for an FDA-approved 
chemotherapeutic agent based on analysis of patient-specific medical information, such as 
patient diagnosis and pathologist confirmed biopsy results. 


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
20
B. Examples of Non-Device CDS Software Functions - Criterion 4 
The following examples are intended to clarify FDA’s interpretation of the fourth criterion in 
section 520(o)(1)(E) of the FD&C Act: software functions considered Non-Device CDS if they 
also meet Criteria 1, 2, and 3.
1. Software function that analyzes patient-specific medical information (e.g., end stage renal 
disease (ESRD) diagnosis, lab test results, and patient demographics from the patient’s 
medical record) and provides an HCP with a list of treatment options for ESRD based on 
implementation of practice guidelines. To enable the HCP to independently review the basis 
for the recommendations presented by the software so that they do not rely primarily on such 
recommendations, but rather on their own judgment, the software labeling and function 
provide the following information to the HCP:
a.
The intended use, HCP user, and patient population are clearly identified. The 
intended use is not time-critical, and the intended HCP is expected to have 
sufficient time and training to understand the practice guidelines that are the basis 
of the recommendations;
b. The input medical information is clearly identified and relevant, with data quality 
requirements to ensure compatibility to enable relevant medical information to be 
extracted from the EHR;
c.
A plain language description of the underlying algorithm development and 
validation that forms the basis for any recommendations is provided. In addition, 
the practice guidelines being implemented are clearly identified to the HCP, and 
the guidelines contain sufficient information on their development and clinical 
studies underlying the recommendations for ESRD treatment options; and
d. The recommendations are provided to the HCP with relevant patient-specific 
information including a description of how the patient-specific information 
matches the criteria for treatment options in the practice guidelines. The output 
indicates whether any expected input medical information from the medical 
record was missing.
2. Software function that recommends a prioritized list of FDA-approved chemotherapeutic 
agents (approved for the patient’s diagnosed cancer type) to an HCP based on analysis of 
reported outcomes in a database of clinical studies using the patient’s diagnosis and 
demographics from the medical record. To enable HCPs to independently review the basis 
for the recommendations presented by the software so that they do not rely primarily on such 
recommendations, but rather on their own judgment, the following information is provided to 
the HCP:
a.
The intended use, HCP user, and patient population are clearly identified. The use 
is not time-critical, and the intended HCP is expected to have sufficient time and 
training to assess the clinical studies that are the basis of the recommendations;
b. The cancer diagnosis and patient demographics are clearly identified as the inputs 
being used in the database search and analysis;
c.
Information about how the clinical studies included were selected, the full reports 
of the clinical studies being relied upon are clearly identified, with a brief 
summary of the strength of each study (e.g., number of patients, outcome metrics, 
randomization, comparison arm), and the key elements of the diagnosis or 
demographics searched for in the medical record are noted;


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
21
d. The prioritized list of FDA-approved chemotherapeutic agents and the basis of the 
prioritization is provided to the HCP, and the studies that most closely matched 
the patient-specific diagnosis and demographics are identified. Other 
considerations, such as the warnings and contraindications from the current 
version of the FDA-approved drug labeling, are also provided to the HCP for 
consideration prior to making a final decision.
3. Software function that analyzes a COPD patient’s age and average number of steps walked 
per day in order to provide a list of follow-up options for the HCP to consider (e.g., office 
visit, chest CT, spirometry) to evaluate disease progression. To enable HCPs to 
independently review the basis for the recommendations presented by the software so that 
they do not rely primarily on such recommendations, but rather on their own judgment, the 
following information is provided to the HCP:
a.
The intended use, HCP user, and patient population are clearly identified. The use 
is not time-critical, and the intended HCP is expected to have sufficient time and 
training to assess the clinical studies that are the basis of the recommendations;
b. The patient’s age and average number of steps walked per day and the date of the 
measurement are clearly identified as the input information. The software also 
describes how this information is collected;
c.
A plain language summary is provided to the HCP describing how the algorithm 
is analyzing patient age and steps walked to assess activity and any validation 
studies, as appropriate;
d. The list of follow-up options is provided to the HCP to consider. The average 
metrics of the patient over time are shown in comparison with a subset of subjects 
from the underlying database with similar age, disease severity and demographics. 
The algorithm identifies limitations to consider, such as number of days with 
missing step information or high variability in daily measurements, which could 
impact the analysis or the follow-up recommendation based on the HCP’s 
judgement.
C.Examples of Device Software Functions 
The following examples illustrate FDA’s interpretation of the criteria in section 520(o)(1)(E) of 
the FD&C Act and describe device software functions which do not meet all four criteria and 
for which FDA intends to focus its regulatory oversight. Certain examples focus on the first 
three criteria in section 520(o)(1)(E). Others focus on the interpretation of Criterion 4 to 
demonstrate scenarios where the software function does not enable the HCP to independently 
review the basis for the recommendations presented by the software. If an example does not 
include a statement reflecting that the software function fails a specific criterion, then for the 
purposes of the example, it can be assumed that the criterion is satisfied. Note that where 
Criterion 3 is referenced, as discussed in more detail in section IV(3) above, if only one option 
is clinically appropriate and the software function otherwise meets all criteria under section 
520(o)(1)(E), FDA intends to exercise enforcement discretion (meaning that FDA does not 
intend to enforce requirements under the FD&C Act) for such functions. 
1. Software function that uses a patient’s image sets (e.g., CT, magnetic resonance (MR)) to 
create an individual treatment plan for review by an HCP for patients undergoing radiation 
therapy treatment with external beam or brachytherapy. This software is a device function. It 
does not meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet 


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
22
Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does 
not meet Criterion 3 because it generates the treatment plan, which is intended to provide a 
specific treatment directive.
2. Software function that manipulates or analyzes images and other data obtained from a 
radiological device (e.g., CT, bone density, and distance between structures) to create 3D 
models of the region intended to be used in planning orthopedic/dental surgical treatments 
with a device. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it is 
intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not intended to 
display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 because it 
generates the models for planning treatment, which is intended to provide a specific 
treatment directive.
3. Software function that manipulates or interpolates data from a patient’s CT scan, providing 
3D reconstruction for visualization of the interior of the bronchial tree to aid in the placement 
of catheters in the bronchial tree and placement of markers into soft lung tissue to guide 
radiosurgery and thoracic surgery. This software is a device function. It does not meet 
Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 2 
because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet 
Criterion 3 because it provides a specific treatment directive.
4. Software function that analyzes multiple signals (e.g., perspiration rate, heart rate, eye 
movement, breathing rate) from wearable products to monitor whether a person is having a 
heart attack or narcolepsy episode. The software is a device function. It does not meet 
Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze signals. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is 
not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 
4 because it provides a specific diagnostic output and supports time-critical decision making.
5. Software function that analyzes near-infrared camera images of a patient intended for use in 
determining or diagnosing a brain hematoma. The software is a device function. It does not 
meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a signal. It does not meet Criterion 2 
because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information.  
6. Software function that calculates the fractal dimension of a lesion and surrounding skin 
image and builds a structural map to provide a diagnosis or identify whether the lesion is 
malignant or benign. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because 
it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not 
intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 
because it provides a specific diagnostic output for a disease or condition.
7. Software function that analyzes CT images to compute and/or approximate fractional flow 
reserve. The intended use is to determine the likelihood that the stenosis impedes oxygen 
delivery to the heart muscle (myocardial ischemia). This software is a device function. It 
does not meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet 
Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does 
not meet Criterion 3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output for a disease or 
condition.
8. Software function that is intended to perform image analysis for diagnostically differentiating 
between ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. This software is a device function. It does not 
meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 
2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet 
Criterion 3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output for a disease or condition.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
23
9. Software function that analyzes signals from a trans-abdominal electromyography device, a 
fetal heart rate monitor, and an intrauterine pressure catheter to determine timing of a C- 
section intervention for an “at term” pregnant woman. This software is a device function. It 
does not meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a medical signal. It does not meet 
Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does 
not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it provides a specific, time-critical treatment output or 
directive for a disease or condition.
10. Software that performs analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spectroscopy data to diagnose 
tuberculosis meningitis or viral meningitis in children. This software is a device function. It 
does not meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a signal. It does not meet Criterion 
2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet 
Criterion 3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output for a disease or condition.
11. Software function that analyzes patient-specific medical information to detect a life- 
threatening condition, such as stroke or sepsis, and generate an alarm or an alert to notify an 
HCP. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it is 
intended to provide a specific diagnostic output or directive, including an alarm which 
supports time-critical decision-making
12. Software function that provides a prioritized list of possible diagnoses of a patient’s 
abnormality based on analysis of its size, shape, appearance, or other functional aspects 
visible in an image. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it 
is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not intended 
to display, analyze, or print medical information.
13. Software function that detects and highlights abnormalities (CADe) and assesses associated 
disease severity (CADx) in an image. This software is a device function. It does not meet 
Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 2 
because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet 
Criterion 3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output or directive for a disease or 
condition
14. Software function that analyzes sound waves captured when users cough or recite certain 
sentences to diagnose bronchitis or sinus infection. This software is a device function. It does 
not meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a signal or pattern. It does not meet 
Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does 
not meet Criterion 3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output or directive for a disease 
or condition.
15. Software function that analyzes breathing patterns from a sleep apnea monitor to diagnose 
sleep apnea or other conditions in patients. This software is a device function. It does not 
meet Criterion 1 because it is intended to analyze a pattern. It does not meet Criterion 2 
because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet 
Criterion 3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output for a disease or condition.
16. Software function that analyzes images of body fluid preparations or digital slides (digital 
pathology) to perform cell counts and morphology reviews to identify patients with low 
white blood cell counts. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 
because it is intended to analyze a medical image. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is 
not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 
because it provides a specific diagnostic output for a disease or condition.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
24
17. Software function that uses a variant call format (VCF) file containing patient-specific 
genetic variants and mutations identified from an NGS Analyzer and provides 
recommendations for FDA-approved treatment options based on those findings. This 
software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it is analyzing a pattern 
from a signal acquisition system (NGS analyzer). It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is 
not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information.
18. Software function that acquires and analyzes electrical signals from ECG leads to generate an 
ECG waveform. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it 
acquires, processes, and analyzes a signal. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not 
intended to display, analyze, or print medical information.
19. Software function that analyzes an ECG waveform output from an FDA-cleared device to 
detect or diagnose arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation). This software is a device function. It 
does not meet Criterion 1 because it analyzes a pattern. It does not meet Criterion 2 because 
it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 
3 because it provides a specific diagnostic output.
20. Software function that analyzes and interprets five sequential RR interval measurements 
from Holter monitor data in a patient medical record to diagnose atrial fibrillation. This 
software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it analyzes a pattern (due 
to the sampling frequency of RR interval measurements). It does not meet Criterion 2 
because it is not intended to analyze medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 
because it provides a specific diagnostic output.
21. Software function that analyzes five sequential RR interval measurements from Holter 
monitor data in a patient medical record to identify a possible heart rhythm irregularity and 
recommend follow-up testing. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 
1 because it analyzes a pattern (due to the sampling frequency of RR interval 
measurements). It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, 
or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 because it provides a specific 
diagnostic output or directive.
22. Software function that analyzes patient-specific measurements (e.g., ST-segment elevation or 
depression as reported on ECG reports and cardiac enzyme laboratory results from the EHR) 
to identify patients potentially experiencing myocardial ischemia or infarction. This software 
is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it provides a specific 
diagnostic output or directive and supports time-critical decision-making.
23. Software function intended for HCP management of heart failure patients that analyzes 
patient-specific medical information (e.g., daily heart rate, SpO2, blood pressure, or other 
output from wearable product) to predict heart failure hospitalization. This software is a 
device function. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it provides a specific diagnostic 
output or directive and supports time-critical decision making.
24. Software function that analyzes hourly pulse oximetry and heart rate measurements (e.g., 
from a patient’s EHR) to identify signs of patient deterioration and alert an HCP. This 
software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it analyzes a pattern. It 
does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical 
information. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it provides a specific diagnostic 
output or directive and supports time-critical decision making.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
25
25. Software function that analyzes glucose measurements output from a CGM every 30 minutes 
to detect periods of potential hypoglycemia and notify the patient’s HCP. This software is a 
device function. It does not meet Criterion 1 because it analyzes a pattern. It does not meet 
Criterion 2 because it is not intended to display, analyze, or print medical information. It does 
not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it provides a specific diagnostic output or directive and 
supports time-critical decision making.
26. Software function that analyzes a radiologist’s score/report of regional contrast discrepancies 
measured from a head CT of a suspected stroke patient to identify whether the HCP should 
initiate a specific drug therapy based on a scoring algorithm. This software is a device 
function. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it provides a specific treatment output or 
directive and supports time-critical decision making.
27. Software function that analyzes the radiologist’s reported imaging findings and other patient-
specific medical information taken by an HCP upon admission as input to a stroke triage 
algorithm that indicates whether to transfer the patient to a major stroke center for an 
intervention. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it 
provides a specific, time-critical diagnostic or treatment output or directive.
28. Software function that helps a diabetic patient manage their blood sugars by calculating bolus 
insulin dose based on carbohydrate intake, pre-meal blood glucose, and anticipated physical 
activity reported to adjust carbohydrate ratio and basal insulin. This software is a device 
function. It does not meet Criterion 3 because it is not intended for an HCP. It does not meet 
Criterion 4 because it supports time-critical decision-making.
29. Software function that analyzes a patient’s symptoms, prior diagnosis, and serum digoxin 
level from the medical record to assess a patient’s likelihood for digoxin toxicity and 
indicates treatment with digoxin immune antigen binding fragments (digibind) for those at 
high risk. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 3 or 4 because it 
provides a specific diagnostic or treatment output or directive and supports time-critical 
decision-making.
30. Software function that analyzes serial cardiac troponin readings over 24 hours to estimate the 
size of a myocardial infarction. This software is a device function. It does not meet Criterion 
1 because it analyzes a pattern. It does not meet Criterion 2 because it is not intended to 
display, analyze, or print medical information. It does not meet Criterion 3 because it 
provides a specific diagnostic output.
31. Software function that analyzes patient-specific medical information found in the medical 
record, including the most recent mammography report findings, in order to provide a list of 
follow-up options for the HCP to consider following a patient’s annual mammogram. The 
software algorithm is trained on a large dataset of 100,000 cases from 10 clinical sites, with 
summary performance based on subsequent cancer detection rates with supplemental 
imaging and biopsy. The product labeling provides information on the purpose of the 
software, the intended user and patient population, and a description of the software outputs. 
The intended use, HCP user, and patient population are clearly identified. The use is not 
time-critical, and the intended HCP is expected to have sufficient time and training to assess 
the studies that are the basis of the recommendations. However, this software is a device 
function since it does not meet Criterion 4 because:
a.
The input medical information is not adequately disclosed to the HCP to be able 
to understand what information is being considered from the patient’s medical 
record or from the radiologist’s report;


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
26
b. While the HCP is informed that an algorithm was trained on a large dataset with 
supplemental imaging and biopsy, specific details on the independence of the 
development and validation datasets, such as the distribution of cases from 
different sites, breast density, ethnicity, or other important factors, are not 
available to the HCP. Without this information, the HCP will not be able to assess 
if the results are generalizable; and
c.
The recommendations are provided to the HCP; however, no additional 
information is available to the HCP to understand the key variables that 
influenced the recommendations.
Taken together, an HCP is not able to independently review the basis for the 
recommendations that the software function provides. As a result, the software function is a 
device.
32. Software function that provides a prioritized list of FDA-authorized depression treatment 
options to an HCP based on an analysis of reported outcomes in a database of clinical 
studies using medical information (e.g., diagnosis and demographics) from the patient’s 
medical record. The intended use, HCP user, and patient population are clearly identified. 
The use is not time critical, and the intended HCP is expected to have sufficient time and 
training to assess the studies that are the basis of the recommendations. The medical 
information from the patient’s medical record is clearly identified to the HCP to be able to 
understand what information is being considered. However, this software is a device 
function since it does not meet Criterion 4 because:
a.
The full report of the clinical studies being relied upon is not made available to 
the user; and
b. The prioritized list of FDA-authorized depression treatment options is provided to 
the user; however, the software does not identify the studies that most closely 
matched the patient-specific diagnosis and demographics and other 
considerations, such as the warning/contraindications from the labeling.
Taken together, an HCP is not able to independently review the basis for the 
recommendations that the software function provides. As a result, the software function is a 
device.


Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
27
Guidance History*
Date 
Description 
Revisions to Final 
Guidance
January 2026 Revisions issued under Level 2 guidance procedures (21 
CFR 10.115(g)(4)).
Minor correction on p.13 & 14 to delete reference to time-
critical decision-making for alignment with January 6, 
2026, update.
*This table was implemented, beginning January 2026 and previous guidance history may not be 
captured in totality.
