AI Risk Management Framework: Second Draft 
    August 18, 2022 
Notes for Reviewers: Call for comments and contributions 
The AI Risk Management Framework 
This second draft of the NIST Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF, or 
Framework) builds on the initial March 2022 version and the December 2021 concept paper. It 
reflects and incorporates the constructive feedback received. 
The AI RMF is intended for voluntary use to address risks in the design, development, use, and 
evaluation of AI products, services, and systems. AI research and development, as well as the 
standards landscape, is evolving rapidly. For that reason, the AI RMF and its companion 
documents will evolve over time and reflect new knowledge, awareness, and practices. NIST 
intends to continue its engagement with stakeholders to keep the Framework up to date with AI 
trends and reflect experience based on the use of the AI RMF. Ultimately, the AI RMF will be 
offered in multiple formats, including online versions, to provide maximum flexibility. 
 Part 1 of the AI RMF draft explains the motivation for developing and using the Framework, its 
audience, and the framing of AI risk and trustworthiness. 
 Part 2 includes the AI RMF Core and a description of Profiles and their use. 
 NIST welcomes feedback on this draft to inform further development of the AI RMF. Please 
send comments via email to AIframework@nist.gov by September 29, 2022. All comments 
received by NIST will be made publicly available, so personal or sensitive information should 
not be included. Feedback will also be welcomed during discussions at a third AI RMF 
workshop on October 18-19, 2022. NIST plans to publish AI RMF 1.0 in January 2023. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
ii 
The AI Risk Management Framework (AI RMF) Playbook 
In concert with the release of the AI RMF second draft, NIST seeks comments on a draft 
companion AI RMF Playbook. The Playbook provides actions Framework users could take to 
implement the AI RMF by incorporating trustworthiness considerations in the design, 
development, use, and evaluation of AI systems. The draft Playbook is based on this second draft 
of the AI RMF. It includes example actions, references, and supplementary guidance for 
“Govern” and “Map” – two of the four proposed functions. Draft material for the “Measure” and 
“Manage” functions will be released at a later date. 
Like the AI RMF, the Playbook is intended for voluntary use. Organizations can utilize this 
information according to their needs and interests. NIST encourages feedback and contributions 
on this draft. The Playbook is an online resource, and is hosted temporarily on GitHub Pages.
The initial AI RMF Playbook will be published in January 2023. It is intended to be an evolving 
resource, and interested parties can submit feedback and suggested additions for adjudication on 
a rolling basis. 
Individuals are encouraged to comment on: 
1. Its relative usefulness as a complementary resource to the AI RMF.
2. Whether the guidance is actionable to meet each of the AI RMF functions, especially as
related to organization size.
3. Suggested presentation alternatives for the forthcoming first online version to improve
usability and effectiveness.
Feedback may be provided either as comments or as specific line-edit additions or modifications. 
NIST welcomes suggestions about including references to existing resources or new resources to 
help users of the AI RMF. Comments can be suggested for the Playbook at any time and will be 
reviewed and integrated on a semi-annual basis. NIST is requesting a first round of comments 
via email to AIframework@nist.gov by September 29, 2022. Comments also will be welcomed 
during discussions at a third AI RMF workshop on October 18-19, 2022, and beyond. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
iii 
The NIST Trustworthy and Responsible AI Resource Center 
The NIST Trustworthy and Responsible AI Resource Center will host the AI RMF, the 
Playbook, and related resources to provide guidance to implement the AI RMF as well as 
advance trustworthy AI more broadly. Contributions of additional guidance – which will 
constitute the bulk of the Resource Center content – are welcome at any time. Contributions may 
include AI RMF profiles, explanatory papers, document templates, approaches to measurement 
and evaluation, toolkits, datasets, policies, or a proposed AI RMF crosswalk with other resources 
– including standards and frameworks. Eventually, contributions could include AI RMF case
studies, reviews of Framework adoption and effectiveness, educational materials, additional
technical forms of technical guidance related to the management of trustworthy AI, and other
implementation resources. The AI Resource Center is expected to include a standards hub and a
metrics hub, along with a terminology knowledge base and relevant technical and policy
documents.
 Contributed guidance may address issues including but not limited to: 
•
how an industry or sector may utilize the Framework
•
how smaller organizations can use the Framework
•
how stakeholder engagement elements of the Framework can be put in place (including
practices for involving external stakeholder communities for assessing risk, and advancing
diversity, equity, and inclusiveness considerations within organizational teams that produce
AI)
•
how the AI RMF can be used for procurement or acquisition activities
•
approaches for integrating teams across one or more parts of the AI lifecycle
•
how the Framework can be used with other AI risk management guidance
•
how the Framework can help address security concerns, including guarding against
adversarial attacks on AI systems
•
socio-technical approaches for evaluating AI system risks
•
techniques for enhancing human oversight of AI system risks
Criteria for Inclusion of Contributions in the AI RMF Playbook and NIST Trustworthy
and Responsible AI Resource Center 
In order to be considered by NIST for inclusion in the Playbook or the NIST Trustworthy and 
Responsible AI Resource Center, a resource must be publicly available on the Internet. NIST 
welcomes free resources from for-profit entities. Pay-for resources from non-profit entities also 
meet the basic criteria for inclusion. If a resource meets these criteria, a description of the 
resource should be sent to AIframework@nist.gov. 
NIST may include commercial entities, equipment, or materials in its guidance or in the NIST 
Trustworthy and Responsible AI Resource Center in order to support Framework understanding 
and use. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor that 
the entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
iv 
 Update Schedule: The AI RMF will employ a two-number versioning system to track and 
identify major changes and key decisions that are made throughout its development. The first 
number will represent the generation of the AI RMF and all of its companion documents. The 
AI RMF generation will be incremented upon a major revision being made to the Framework. 
The most up-to-date version of all AI RMF documents will have the same generation identifier. 
Minor revisions will be tracked using “.n” after the generation number. The minor revision 
identifier will be incremented upon any edit to the document. It is possible that AI RMF 
resources will have different minor revision identifiers. At a high level, all changes will be 
tracked using a Version Control Table which identifies the history, including version number, 
date of change, and description of change. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
v 
Table of Contents 
Part 1 
1.
OVERVIEW
1 
1.1. 
Trustworthy and Responsible AI 
1 
1.2. 
Purpose of the AI RMF 
2 
1.3. 
Where to Get More Information 
3 
2.
AUDIENCE
4 
3.
FRAMING RISK
7 
3.1. 
Understanding Risk, Impacts, and Harms 
7 
3.2. 
Challenges for AI Risk Management 
8 
4.
AI RISKS AND TRUSTWORTHINESS
10 
4.1. 
Valid and Reliable 
13 
4.2. 
Safe 
13 
4.3. 
Fair – and Bias Is Managed 
14 
4.4. 
Secure and Resilient 
14 
4.5. 
Transparent and Accountable 
15 
4.6. 
Explainable and Interpretable 
15 
4.7. 
Privacy-Enhanced 
16 
5.
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE AI RMF
16 
Part 2 
6.
AI RMF CORE
17 
6.1. 
Govern 
18 
6.2. 
Map 
20 
6.3. 
Measure 
23 
6.4. 
Manage 
25 
7.
AI RMF PROFILES
26 
Appendices 
APPENDIX A: DESCRIPTIONS OF AI ACTOR TASKS FROM FIGURE 1 
27 
APPENDIX B: HOW AI RISKS DIFFER FROM TRADITIONAL SOFTWARE RISKS 
30 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
1 
AI Risk Management Framework 
Part 1: Motivation 
1. Overview
 1.1. Trustworthy and Responsible AI 
Remarkable surges in artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities have led to a wide range of 
innovations with the potential to benefit nearly all aspects of our society and economy – from 
commerce and healthcare to transportation and cybersecurity. AI technologies are often used to 
achieve a beneficial impact by informing, advising, or simplifying tasks. 
Managing AI risk is not unlike managing risk for other types of technology. Risks to any 
software or information-based system apply to AI, including concerns related to cybersecurity, 
privacy, safety, and infrastructure. Like those areas, effects from AI systems can be characterized 
as long- or short-term, high- or low-probability, systemic or localized, and high- or low-impact. 
However, AI systems bring a set of risks that require specific consideration and approaches. AI 
systems can amplify, perpetuate, or exacerbate inequitable outcomes. AI systems may exhibit 
emergent properties or lead to unintended consequences for individuals and communities. A 
useful mathematical representation of the data interactions 
that drive the AI system’s behavior is not fully known, 
which makes current methods for measuring risks and 
navigating the risk-benefits tradeoff inadequate. AI risks 
may arise from the data used to train the AI system, the AI 
system itself, the use of the AI system, or interaction of 
people with the AI system. 
While views about what makes an AI technology 
trustworthy differ, there are certain key characteristics of 
trustworthy systems. Trustworthy AI is valid and reliable, 
safe, fair and bias is managed, secure and resilient, 
accountable and transparent, explainable and 
interpretable, and privacy-enhanced.
AI systems are socio-technical in nature, meaning they are a product of the complex human, 
organizational, and technical factors involved in their design, development, and use. Many of the 
trustworthy AI characteristics – such as bias, fairness, interpretability, and privacy – are directly 
connected to societal dynamics and human behavior. AI risks – and benefits – can emerge from 
the interplay of technical aspects combined with socio-technical factors related to how a system 
The AI RMF refers to an AI system as 
an engineered or machine-based 
system that can, for a given set of 
human-defined objectives, generate 
outputs such as predictions, 
recommendations, or decisions 
influencing real or virtual 
environments. AI systems are 
designed to operate with varying 
levels of autonomy (Adapted from: 
OECD Recommendation on AI:2019; 
ISO/IEC 22989:2022). 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
2 
is used, its interactions with other AI systems, who operates it, and the social context into which 
it is deployed.  
Responsible use and practice of AI systems is a counterpart to AI system trustworthiness. AI 
systems are not inherently bad or risky, and it is often the contextual environment that 
determines whether or not negative impact will occur. The AI Risk Management Framework (AI 
RMF) can help organizations enhance their understanding of how the contexts in which the AI 
systems they build and deploy may interact with and affect individuals, groups, and 
communities. Responsible AI use and practice can:  
» assist AI designers, developers, deployers, evaluators, and users to think more critically 
about context and potential or unexpected negative and positive impacts;  
» be leveraged to design, develop, evaluate, and use AI systems with impact in mind; and 
» prevent, preempt, detect, mitigate, and manage AI risks. 
1.2. Purpose of the AI RMF 
Cultivating trust by understanding and managing the risks of AI systems will help preserve civil 
liberties and rights, and enhance safety while creating opportunities for innovation and realizing 
the full potential of this technology. The AI RMF is intended to address challenges unique to AI 
systems and encourage and equip different AI stakeholders to manage AI risks proactively and 
purposefully. The Framework describes a process for managing AI risks across a wide spectrum 
of types, applications, and maturity – regardless of sector, size, or level of familiarity with a 
specific type of technology. Rather than repeat information in other guidance, the AI RMF aims 
to fill gaps specific to AI risks. Users of the AI RMF are encouraged to address non-AI specific 
issues via currently available guidance. 
The AI RMF is a voluntary framework seeking to provide a flexible, structured, and measurable 
process to address AI risks prospectively and continuously throughout the AI lifecycle. It is 
intended to help organizations manage both enterprise and societal risks related to the design, 
development, deployment, evaluation, and use of AI systems through improved understanding, 
detection, and preemption. Using the AI RMF can assist organizations, industries, and society to 
understand and determine their acceptable levels of risk. 
The AI RMF is not a checklist and it is not intended to be used in isolation. Organizations may 
find it valuable to incorporate the AI RMF into broader considerations of enterprise risk 
management.  
The AI RMF is not a compliance mechanism. It is law- and regulation-agnostic, as AI policy 
discussions are live and evolving. While risk management practices should incorporate and align 
to applicable laws and regulations, this document is not intended to supersede existing 
regulations, laws, or other mandates. 
The research community may find the AI RMF to be useful in evaluating various aspects of 
trustworthy and responsible AI and related impacts.  


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
3 
By applying recommendations in the AI RMF, organizations will be better equipped to govern, 
map, measure, and manage the risks of AI. Using the AI RMF may reduce the likelihood and 
degree of negative impacts and increase the benefits to individuals, groups, communities, 
organizations, and society.  
Applying the Framework at the beginning of an AI system’s lifecycle should dramatically 
increase the likelihood that the resulting system will be more trustworthy – and that risks to 
individuals, groups, communities, organizations, and society will be managed more effectively. 
It is incumbent on Framework users to apply the AI RMF functions to AI systems on a regular 
basis as context, stakeholder expectations, and knowledge will evolve over time and as their AI 
systems are updated or expanded. 
NIST’s development of the AI RMF in collaboration with the private and public sectors is 
directed  – and consistent with its broader AI efforts called for – by the National Artificial 
Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-283), the National Security Commission on 
Artificial Intelligence recommendations, and the Plan for Federal Engagement in Developing 
Technical Standards and Related Tools. Engagement with the broad AI community during this 
Framework’s development informs AI research and development and evaluation by NIST and 
others.  
Part 1 of this Framework establishes the context for the AI risk management process. Part 2 
provides guidance on outcomes and activities to carry out that process to maximize the benefits 
and minimize the risks of AI. A companion resource, the AI RMF Playbook, offers sample 
practices to be considered in carrying out this guidance, before, during, and after AI products, 
services, and systems are developed and deployed. 
1.3. Where to Get More Information 
The Framework and supporting resources will be updated, expanded, and improved based on 
evolving technology, the standards landscape around the globe, and stakeholder feedback. As the 
AI RMF is put into use, additional lessons will be learned to inform future updates and additional 
resources.  
The AI RMF and the Playbook will be supported by a broader NIST Trustworthy and 
Responsible AI Resource Center containing documents, taxonomies, toolkits, datasets, code, and 
other forms of technical guidance related to the development and implementation of trustworthy 
AI. The Resource Center will include a knowledge base of trustworthy and responsible AI 
terminology and how those terms are used by different stakeholders, along with documents that 
provide a deeper understanding of trustworthy characteristics and their inherent challenges.  
The AI RMF provides high-level guidance for managing the risks of AI systems. While practical 
guidance published by NIST serves as an informative reference, all such guidance remains 
voluntary. 
 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
4 
 
Attributes of the AI RMF  
The AI RMF strives to: 
1. Be risk-based, resource-efficient, pro-innovation, and voluntary. 
2. Be consensus-driven and developed and regularly updated through an open, transparent process. 
All stakeholders should have the opportunity to contribute to the AI RMF’s development.  
3. Use clear and plain language that is understandable by a broad audience, including senior 
executives, government officials, non-governmental organization leadership, and those who are 
not AI professionals – while still of sufficient technical depth to be useful to practitioners. The AI 
RMF should allow for communication of AI risks across an organization, between organizations, 
with customers, and to the public at large. 
4. Provide common language and understanding to manage AI risks. The AI RMF should offer 
taxonomy, terminology, definitions, metrics, and characterizations for AI risk. 
5. Be easily usable and fit well with other aspects of risk management. Use of the Framework 
should be intuitive and readily adaptable as part of an organization’s broader risk management 
strategy and processes. It should be consistent or aligned with other approaches to managing AI 
risks. 
6. Be useful to a wide range of perspectives, sectors, and technology domains. The AI RMF should 
be universally applicable to any AI technology and to context-specific use cases.  
7. Be outcome-focused and non-prescriptive. The Framework should provide a catalog of outcomes 
and approaches rather than prescribe one-size-fits-all requirements. 
8. Take advantage of and foster greater awareness of existing standards, guidelines, best practices, 
methodologies, and tools for managing AI risks – as well as illustrate the need for additional, 
improved resources. 
9. Be law- and regulation-agnostic. The Framework should support organizations’ abilities to 
operate under applicable domestic and international legal or regulatory regimes. 
10. Be a living document. The AI RMF should be readily updated as technology, understanding, and 
approaches to AI trustworthiness and uses of AI change and as stakeholders learn from 
implementing AI risk management generally and this framework in particular.  
 
2. Audience 
Identifying and managing AI risks and impacts – both positive and negative – requires a broad 
set of perspectives and stakeholders. The AI RMF is intended to be used by AI actors, defined by 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as “those who play an 
active role in the AI system lifecycle, including organizations and individuals that deploy or 
operate AI” [OECD (2019) Artificial Intelligence in Society | OECD iLibrary].  


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
5 
OECD has developed a framework for classifying AI actors and their AI lifecycle activities 
according to five key socio-technical dimensions, each with properties relevant for AI policy and 
governance, including risk management [OECD (2022) OECD Framework for the Classification 
of AI systems | OECD Digital Economy Papers]. For purposes of this framework, NIST has 
slightly modified OECD’s classification. The NIST modification (shown in Figure 1) highlights 
the importance of test, evaluation, verification, and validation (TEVV) throughout an AI 
lifecycle and generalizes the operational context of an AI system.  
 
Figure 1: Lifecycle and Key Dimensions of an AI System. Modified from OECD (2022) OECD 
Framework for the Classification of AI systems | OECD Digital Economy Papers. Risk management 
should be continuous, timely, and performed throughout the AI system lifecycle, starting with the plan & 
design function in the application context. 
The broad audience of the AI RMF is shown in Figure 1. It is composed of AI actors with a 
variety of roles described below and in Appendix A who must work together to manage the risk 
and achieve the goals of trustworthy and responsible AI.   
The primary audience for using this framework is displayed in the Applications Context, Data & 
Input, AI Model, and Task & Output dimensions of Figure 1. These individuals and teams 
manage the design, development, deployment, and acquisition of AI systems and will be driving 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
6 
AI risk management efforts. The primary audience also includes those with responsibilities to 
commission or fund an AI system and those who are part of the enterprise management structure 
governing the AI system lifecycle.  
 
 
Figure 2: AI actors across the AI lifecycle. 
 
Figure 2 lists representative AI actors across the AI lifecycle. AI actors with expertise to carry 
out TEVV tasks are especially likely to benefit from the Framework. AI actors with TEVV 
expertise are integrated throughout the AI lifecycle. TEVV tasks are foundational to risk 
management, providing knowledge and feedback for AI system management and governance. 
Performed regularly, TEVV tasks assess the system relative to technical, societal, legal, and 
ethical standards or norms, as well as monitor and assess risks of emergent properties. As a 
regular process within an AI lifecycle, TEVV allows for both mid-course remediation and post-
hoc risk management and mitigation. 
The People & Planet dimension of the AI lifecycle represented in Figure 1 presents an additional 
AI RMF audience: end-users or affected entities who play an important consultative role to the 
primary audiences. Their insights and input equip others to analyze context, identify, monitor 
and manage risks of the AI system by providing formal or quasi-formal norms or guidance. They 
include trade groups, standards developing organizations, advocacy groups, environmental 
groups, researchers, and civil society organizations. Their actions can designate boundaries for 
operation (technical, societal, legal, and ethical). They also promote discussion of the tradeoffs 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
7 
needed to balance societal values and priorities related to civil liberties and rights, equity, and the 
economy. 
A sense of collective responsibility among the many AI actors is essential for AI risk 
management to be successful.  
3. Framing Risk 
AI risk management is about offering a path to minimize potential negative impacts of AI 
systems, such as threats to civil liberties and rights, as well as pointing to opportunities to 
maximize positive impacts. Identifying, mitigating, and minimizing risks and potential harms 
associated with AI technologies are essential steps towards the development of trustworthy AI 
systems and their appropriate and responsible use. If a risk management framework can help to 
effectively address, document, and manage AI risk and negative impacts, it can lead to more 
trustworthy AI systems. 
3.1. Understanding Risk, Impacts, and Harms 
In the context of the AI RMF, “risk” refers to the composite measure of an event’s probability of 
occurring and the magnitude (or degree) of the consequences of the corresponding events. The 
impacts, or consequences, of AI systems can be positive, negative, or both and can result in 
opportunities or threats (Adapted from: ISO 31000:2018). When considering the negative impact 
of a potential event, risk is a function of 1) the negative impact, or magnitude of harm, that 
would arise if the circumstance or event occurs and 2) the likelihood of occurrence (Adapted 
from: OMB Circular A-130:2016). Negative impact or harm can be experienced by individuals, 
groups, communities, organizations, society, the environment, and the planet.  
While risk management processes address negative impacts, 
this framework offers approaches to minimize anticipated 
negative impacts of AI systems and identify opportunities to 
maximize positive impacts. Additionally, the AI RMF is 
designed to be responsive to new risks as they emerge. This 
flexibility is particularly important where impacts are not 
easily foreseeable and applications are evolving. While some 
AI risks and benefits are well-known, it can be challenging to assess the degree to which a 
negative impact is related to actual harms. Figure 3 provides examples of potential harms that 
can be related to AI systems. 
Risk management can drive AI developers and users to understand and account for the inherent 
uncertainties and inaccuracies in their models and systems, which in turn can improve their 
overall performance and trustworthiness. 
“Risk management refers to 
coordinated activities to direct and 
control an organization with regard 
to risk” (Source: ISO 31000:2018). 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
8 
Figure 3: Examples of potential harms related to AI systems. Trustworthy AI systems and their 
responsible use can mitigate risks and contribute to benefits for people, organizations, and systems.  
 
3.2. Challenges for AI Risk Management  
The AI RMF aims to help organizations address a variety of essential risk management issues, 
emphasizing that context is critical. Several challenges described below stand out for managing 
risks in pursuit of AI trustworthiness. 
3.2.1. Risk Measurement  
AI risks and impacts that are not well-defined or adequately understood are difficult to measure 
quantitatively or qualitatively. 
Third-party data or systems can accelerate research and development and facilitate technology 
transition. They may also complicate risk measurement because the metrics or methodologies 
used by the organization developing the AI system may not align (or may not be transparent or 
documented) with the metrics or methodologies used by the organization deploying or operating 
the system. Risk measurement and management can further be complicated by how third-party 
data or systems are used or integrated into AI products or services.  
Organizations will want to identify and track emergent risks and consider techniques for 
measuring them.  


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
9 
Approaches for measuring impacts on a population should consider that harms affect different 
groups and contexts differently. AI system impact assessments can help AI actors understand 
potential impacts or harms within specific contexts.  
Measuring risk at an earlier stage in the AI lifecycle may yield different results than measuring 
risk at a later stage. Other risks may be latent at a given time but may increase as AI systems 
evolve.  
AI risks measured in a laboratory or a controlled environment may differ from risks that emerge 
in operational setting or the real world.  
Furthermore, inscrutable AI systems can complicate the measurement of risk. Inscrutability can 
be a result of the opaque quality of AI systems (lack of explainability or interpretability), lack of 
transparency or documentation in AI system development or deployment, or inherent 
uncertainties in AI systems. 
3.2.2. Risk Tolerance  
While the AI RMF can be used to prioritize risk, it does not prescribe risk tolerance. Risk 
tolerance refers to the organization’s or stakeholder’s readiness or appetite to bear the risk in 
order to achieve its objectives. Risk tolerance can be influenced by legal or regulatory 
requirements (Adapted from: ISO Guide 73). Risk tolerance and the level of risk that is 
acceptable to organizations or society are highly contextual and application and use-case 
specific. Risk tolerances can be influenced by policies and norms established by AI system 
owners, organizations, industries, communities, or policy makers. Risk tolerances are likely to 
change and adapt over time as AI systems, policies, and norms evolve. In addition, different 
organizations may have different risk tolerances due to varying organizational priorities and 
resource considerations. Even within a single organization there can be a balancing of priorities 
and tradeoffs.  
Emerging knowledge and methods to better inform cost-benefit tradeoffs will continue to be 
developed and debated by business, governments, academia, and civil society. To the extent that 
challenges for specifying risk tolerances remain unresolved, there may be contexts where a risk 
management framework is not yet readily applicable for mitigating AI risks. In the absence of 
risk tolerances prescribed by existing law, regulation, or norms, the AI RMF equips 
organizations to define reasonable risk tolerance, manage those risks, and document their risk 
management process. 
When applying the AI RMF, risks which the organization determines to be highest for AI 
systems and contexts call for the most urgent prioritization and most thorough risk management 
process. Doing so can mitigate risks and harms to enterprises and individuals, communities, and 
society. In some cases where an AI system presents the highest risk – where negative impacts are 
imminent, severe harms are actually occurring, or catastrophic risks are present – development 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
10 
and deployment should cease in a safe manner until risks can be sufficiently mitigated. 
Conversely, the lowest-risk AI systems and contexts suggest lower prioritization.  
3.2.3. Risk Perspectives 
Attempting to eliminate risk entirely can be counterproductive in practice – because incidents 
and failures cannot be eliminated – and may lead to unrealistic expectations and resource 
allocation that may exacerbate risk and make risk triage impractical. A risk mitigation culture 
can help organizations recognize that not all AI risks are the same, so they can allocate resources 
purposefully. Risk management efforts should align to the risk-level and impact of an AI system, 
and policies should lay out clear guidelines for assessing each AI system an organization 
deploys.  
3.2.4. Organizational Integration of Risk 
The AI RMF is neither a checklist nor a compliance mechanism to be used in isolation. It should 
be integrated within the organization developing and using AI technologies and incorporated into 
broader risk management strategy and processes. Thereby AI will be treated along with other 
critical risks, yielding a more integrated outcome and resulting in organizational efficiencies. 
In some scenarios the AI RMF may be utilized along with related guidance and frameworks for 
managing AI system risks or broader enterprise risks. Some risks related to AI systems are 
common across other types of software development and deployment. Overlapping risks include 
privacy concerns related to the use of underlying data to train AI systems, and security concerns 
related to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of training and output data for AI systems.  
Organizations need to establish and maintain the appropriate accountability mechanisms, roles 
and responsibilities, culture, and incentive structures for risk management to be effective. Use of 
the AI RMF alone will not lead to these changes or provide the appropriate incentives. Effective 
risk management needs organizational commitment at senior levels and may require cultural 
change within an organization or industry. In addition, small to medium-sized organizations may 
face challenges in implementing the AI RMF which can be different from those of large 
organizations, depending on their capabilities and resources. 
4. AI Risks and Trustworthiness  
Approaches which enhance AI trustworthiness can also contribute to a reduction of AI risks. 
This Framework articulates the following characteristics of trustworthy AI, and offers guidance 
for addressing them. Trustworthy AI is: valid and reliable, safe, fair and bias is managed, 
secure and resilient, accountable and transparent, explainable and interpretable, and 
privacy-enhanced.  


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
11 
Figure 4: AI trustworthy characteristics. 
 
These characteristics are inextricably tied to human social and organizational behavior, the 
datasets used by AI systems and the decisions made by those who build them, and the 
interactions with the humans who provide insight from and oversight of such systems. Human 
judgment must be employed when deciding on the specific metrics related to AI trustworthy 
characteristics and the precise threshold values for their related metrics.  
Addressing AI trustworthy characteristics individually will not assure AI system trustworthiness, 
and tradeoffs are always involved. Trustworthiness is greater than the sum of its parts. 
Ultimately, it is a social concept, and the characteristics listed in any single guidance document 
will be more or less important in any given situation to establish trustworthiness. 
Increasing the breadth and diversity of stakeholder input throughout the AI lifecycle can enhance 
opportunities for identifying AI system benefits and positive impacts, and increase the likelihood 
that risks arising in social contexts are managed appropriately. 
 
Trustworthiness characteristics explained in this document are interrelated. Highly 
secure but unfair systems, accurate but opaque and uninterpretable systems, and 
inaccurate but secure, privacy-enhanced, and transparent systems are all 
undesirable. Trustworthy AI systems should achieve a high degree of control over 
risk while retaining a high level of performance quality. Achieving this difficult 
goal requires a comprehensive approach to risk management, with tradeoffs among 
the trustworthiness characteristics. It is the joint responsibility of all AI actors to 
determine whether AI technology is an appropriate or necessary tool for a given 
context or purpose, and how to use it responsibly. The decision to commission or 
deploy an AI system should be based on a contextual assessment of trustworthiness 
characteristics and the relative risks, impacts, costs, and benefits, and informed by a 
broad set of stakeholders.  
 
Table 1 maps the AI RMF taxonomy to the terminology used by the OECD in their 
Recommendation on AI, the proposed European Union (EU) Artificial Intelligence Act, and 
United States Executive Order (EO) 13960. 
 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
12 
Table 1: Mapping of AI RMF taxonomy to AI policy documents. 
AI RMF 
OECD AI 
Recommendation 
EU AI Act 
(Proposed) 
EO 13960 
Valid and reliable 
Robustness 
Technical 
robustness 
Purposeful and performance 
driven 
Accurate, reliable, and effective 
Regularly monitored 
Safe 
Safety 
Safety 
Safe 
Fair and bias is 
managed 
Human-centered values 
and fairness 
Non-discrimination 
Diversity and 
fairness 
Data governance 
Lawful and respectful of our 
Nation’s values 
Secure and 
resilient 
Security 
Security & 
resilience 
Secure and resilient 
Transparent and 
accountable 
Transparency and 
responsible disclosure 
Accountability 
Transparency 
Accountability 
Human agency and 
oversight 
 
Transparent 
Accountable 
Lawful and respectful of our 
Nation’s values 
Responsible and traceable 
Regularly monitored 
Explainable and 
interpretable 
Explainability 
 
Understandable by subject 
matter experts, users, and 
others, as appropriate 
Privacy-enhanced 
Human values; Respect 
for human rights 
Privacy 
Data governance 
Lawful and respectful of our 
Nation’s values 
 
Human Factors 
Since AI systems can make sense of information more quickly and consistently than humans, they are 
often deployed in high-impact settings as a way to make decisions fairer and more impartial than human 
decision-making, and to do so more efficiently. One common strategy for managing risks in such settings 
is the use of a human “in-the-loop” (HITL). Unclear expectations about how the HITL can provide 
oversight for systems, and imprecise governance structures for their configurations are two points for 
consideration in AI risk management. Identifying which actor should provide which oversight task can be 
imprecise, with responsibility often falling on the human experts involved in AI-based decision-making 
tasks. In many settings such experts provide their insights about particular domain knowledge, and are not 
necessarily able to perform intended oversight or governance functions for AI systems they played no role 
in developing. It isn’t just HITLs; any AI actor, regardless of oversight role, carries their own cognitive 
biases into the design, development, deployment, and use of AI systems. Biases can be induced by AI 
actors across the AI lifecycle via assumptions, expectations, and decisions during modeling tasks. These 
challenges are exacerbated by AI system opacity and the resulting lack of interpretability. The degree to 
which humans are empowered and incentivized to challenge AI system suggestions must be understood. 
Data about the frequency and rationale with which humans overrule AI system suggestions in deployed 
systems can be useful to collect and analyze. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
13 
4.1. Valid and Reliable 
Accuracy, and robustness are interdependent factors contributing to the validity and 
trustworthiness of AI systems. Deployment of AI systems which are inaccurate, unreliable, or 
non-generalizable to data beyond their training data (i.e., not robust) creates and increases AI 
risks and reduces trustworthiness.  
Measures of accuracy – “closeness of results of observations, computations, or estimates to the 
true values or the values accepted as being true” (Source: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022) – should 
address both computational-centric (e.g., false positive and false negative rates) and human-AI 
teaming aspects. Accuracy measurements should always be paired with clearly defined test sets 
and details about test methodology; both should be included in associated documentation.  
Reliability – “ability of an item to perform as required, without failure, for a given time interval, 
under given conditions” (Source: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022) is a goal for overall correctness of 
model operation under the conditions of expected use and over a given period of time, to include 
the entire lifetime of the system.  
Robustness or generalizability – “ability of an AI system to maintain its level of performance 
under a variety of circumstances” (Source: ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022) – is a goal for appropriate 
system functionality in a broad set of conditions and circumstances, including uses of AI systems 
not initially anticipated. Robustness does not only require that the system perform exactly as it 
does under expected uses, but also that it should perform in ways that minimize potential harms 
to people if it is operating in an unexpected environment.  
Validity and reliability for deployed AI systems is often assessed by ongoing audits or 
monitoring that confirm a system is performing as intended. Measurement of accuracy, 
reliability, and robustness contribute to trustworthiness and should consider that certain types of 
failures can cause greater harm – and risks should be managed to minimize the negative impact 
of those failures. 
4.2. Safe 
AI systems “should not, under defined conditions, cause physical or psychological harm or lead 
to a state in which human life, health, property, or the environment is endangered” (Source: 
ISO/IEC TS 5723:2022). Safe operation of AI systems requires responsible design and 
development practices, clear information to deployers on how to use a system appropriately, and 
responsible decision-making by deployers and end-users.  
Employing safety considerations during planning and design can prevent failures or conditions 
that can render a system dangerous. Other practical approaches for AI safety often relate to 
rigorous simulation and in-domain testing, real-time monitoring, and the ability to shut down or 
modify systems that deviate from intended or expected functionality.  


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
14 
AI safety measures should take cues from measures of safety used in other fields, such as 
transportation and healthcare. 
4.3. Fair – and Bias Is Managed 
Fairness in AI includes concerns for equality and equity by addressing issues such as bias and 
discrimination. Standards of fairness can be complex and difficult to define because perceptions 
of fairness differ among cultures and may shift depending on application. Systems in which 
biases are mitigated are not necessarily fair. For example, systems in which predictions are 
somewhat balanced across demographic groups may still be inaccessible to individuals with 
disabilities or affected by the digital divide. 
NIST has identified three major categories of AI bias to be considered and managed: systemic, 
computational, and human, all of which can occur in the absence of prejudice, partiality, or 
discriminatory intent. Systemic bias can be present in AI datasets, the organizational norms, 
practices, and processes across the AI lifecycle, and the broader society that uses AI systems. 
Computational bias can be present in AI datasets and algorithmic processes, and often stems 
from systematic errors due to non-representative samples. Human biases relate to how an 
individual or group perceives AI system information to make a decision or fill in missing 
information. Human biases are omnipresent in decision-making processes across the AI lifecycle 
and system use. Human biases are implicit, so increasing awareness does not assure control or 
improvement. 
Bias exists in many forms, and can become ingrained in the automated systems that help make 
decisions about our lives. While bias is not always a negative phenomenon, certain biases 
exhibited in AI models and systems can perpetuate and amplify negative impacts on individuals, 
groups, communities, organizations, and society – and at a speed and scale far beyond the 
traditional discriminatory practices that can result from implicit human or systemic biases. Bias 
is tightly associated with the concepts of transparency as well as fairness in society. (See NIST 
Special Publication 1270, “Towards a Standard for Identifying and Managing Bias in Artificial 
Intelligence.”) 
4.4. Secure and Resilient 
AI systems that can withstand adversarial attacks, or more generally, unexpected changes in their 
environment or use, or to maintain their functions and structure in the face of internal and 
external change, and to degrade gracefully when this is necessary (Adapted from: ISO/IEC TS 
5723:2022) may be said to be resilient. AI systems that can maintain confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability through protection mechanisms that prevent unauthorized access and use may be 
said to be secure. 
Security and resilience are related but distinct characteristics. While resilience is the ability to 
return to normal function after an attack, security includes resilience but also encompasses 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
15 
protocols to avoid or protect against attacks. Resilience has some relationship to robustness 
except that it goes beyond the provenance of the data to encompass unexpected or adversarial 
use of the model or data. Other common security concerns relate to data poisoning and the 
exfiltration of models, training data, or other intellectual property through AI system endpoints.  
4.5. Transparent and Accountable 
Transparency reflects the extent to which information is available to individuals about an AI 
system, if they are interacting – or even aware that they are interacting – with such a system. Its 
scope spans from design decisions and training data to model training, the structure of the model, 
its intended use case, and how and when deployment or end user decisions were made and by 
whom. Transparency is often necessary for actionable redress related to AI system outputs that 
are incorrect or otherwise lead to negative impacts. A transparent system is not necessarily an 
accurate, privacy-enhanced, or secure, or fair system. It is difficult to determine whether an 
opaque system possesses such characteristics and to do so over time as complex systems evolve.  
Determinations of accountability in the AI context relate to expectations of the responsible party 
in the event that a risky outcome is realized. The shared responsibility of all AI actors should be 
considered when seeking to hold actors accountable for the outcomes of AI systems. The 
relationship between risk and accountability associated with AI and technological systems more 
broadly differs across cultural, legal, sectoral, and societal contexts. Grounding organizational 
practices and governing structures for harm reduction, like risk management, can help lead to 
more accountable systems. 
Maintaining the provenance of training data and supporting attribution of decisions of the AI 
system to subsets of training data can assist with both transparency and accountability. 
4.6. Explainable and Interpretable 
Explainability refers to a representation of the mechanisms underlying an algorithm’s operation, 
whereas interpretability refers to the meaning of AI systems’ output in the context of its designed 
functional purpose. Together, they assist those operating or overseeing an AI system to do so 
effectively and responsibly. The underlying assumption is that perceptions of risk stem from a 
lack of ability to make sense of, or contextualize, system output appropriately.  
Risk from lack of explainability may be managed by descriptions of how models work tailored to 
individual differences such as the user’s knowledge and skill level. Explainable systems can be 
more easily debugged and monitored, and they lend themselves to more thorough 
documentation, audit, and governance. Risks to interpretability can often be addressed by 
communicating a description of why an AI system made a particular prediction or 
recommendation. (See NISTIR 8312, “Four Principles of Explainable Artificial Intelligence” and 
NISTIR 8367, “Psychological Foundations of Explainability and Interpretability in Artificial 
Intelligence”.) 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
16 
4.7. Privacy-Enhanced 
Privacy refers generally to the norms and practices that help to safeguard human autonomy, 
identity, and dignity. These norms and practices typically address freedom from intrusion, 
limiting observation, or individuals’ agency to consent to disclosure or control of facets of their 
identities (e.g., body, data, reputation). (See The NIST Privacy Framework: A Tool for 
Improving Privacy through Enterprise Risk Management.)  
Privacy values such as anonymity, confidentiality, and control generally should guide choices for 
AI system design, development, and deployment. From a policy perspective, privacy-related 
risks may overlap with security, bias, and transparency. Like safety and security, specific 
technical features of an AI system may promote or reduce privacy, and assessors can identify 
how the processing of data could create privacy-related problems. 
5. Effectiveness of the AI RMF 
The goal of the AI RMF is to offer a resource for improving the ability of organizations to 
manage AI risks to maximize benefits and to minimize AI-related harms to individuals, groups, 
organizations, and society. Evaluations of AI RMF effectiveness – including ways to measure 
bottom-line improvements in the trustworthiness of AI systems – will be part of future NIST 
activities, in conjunction with stakeholders.   
Organizations and other users of the Framework are encouraged to periodically evaluate whether 
the AI RMF has improved their ability to manage AI risks, including but not limited to their 
policies, processes, practices, implementation plans, indicators, and expected outcomes. The 
Framework users are expected to benefit from: 
» enhanced processes for governing, mapping, measuring, and managing AI risk, and clearly 
documenting outcomes; 
» enhanced awareness of the relationships between and among trustworthiness characteristics, 
socio-technical approaches, and AI risks; 
» established processes for making go/no-go system commissioning and deployment decisions; 
» established policies, processes, practices, and procedures for improving organizational 
accountability efforts related to AI system risks; 
» enhanced organizational culture which prioritizes the identification and management of AI 
system risks and impacts to individuals, communities, organizations, and society; 
» enhanced information sharing within and across organizations about decision-making 
processes, responsibilities, common pitfalls, and approaches for continuous improvement; 
» enhanced contextual knowledge for increased awareness of downstream risks; 
» enhanced awareness of the importance and efficacy of stakeholder engagement efforts; and 
» enhanced capacity for TEVV of AI systems and associated risks. 
 
 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
17 
Part 2: Core and Profiles 
6. AI RMF Core
The AI RMF Core provides outcomes and actions that enable dialogue, understanding, and 
activities to manage AI risks. As illustrated in Figure 5, the Core is composed of four functions: 
Map, Measure, Manage, and Govern. Each of these high-level functions is broken down into 
categories and subcategories. Categories and subcategories are subdivided into specific outcomes 
and actions. Actions do not constitute a checklist, nor are they necessarily an ordered set of steps. 
Figure 5: Functions organize AI risk management activities at their highest level to govern, map, 
measure, and manage AI risks. Governance is a cross-cutting function that is infused throughout and 
informs the other functions of the process. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
18 
Framework users may apply these functions as best suits their needs for managing AI risks. 
Some organizations may choose to select from among the categories and subcategories; others 
will want and have the capacity to apply all categories and subcategories. Assuming a 
governance structure is in place, functions may be performed in any order across the AI lifecycle 
as deemed to add value by a user of the framework. After instituting the outcomes in Govern, 
most users of the AI RMF would start with the Map function and continue to Measure or 
Manage. However users integrate the functions, the process should be iterative, with cross-
referencing between functions as necessary. Similarly, there are categories and subcategories 
with elements that apply to multiple functions, or that have to occur before certain subcategory 
decisions. 
 
Risk management should be continuous, timely, and performed throughout the AI system 
lifecycle dimensions. AI RMF core functions should be carried out in a way that reflects diverse 
and multidisciplinary perspectives, potentially including the views of stakeholders from outside 
the organization. Having a diverse team contributes to more open sharing of ideas and 
assumptions about the purpose and function of the technology being designed and developed – 
which can create opportunities for surfacing problems and identifying existing and emergent 
risks.  
An online companion resource to the AI RMF, referred to as the NIST AI RMF Playbook, is 
available to help organizations navigate the AI RMF and achieve the outcomes through 
suggested tactical actions they can apply within their own contexts. The Playbook is voluntary 
and organizations can utilize the suggestions according to their needs and interests. Playbook 
users can create tailored guidance from suggested material for their own use, and contribute their 
suggestions for inclusion to the broader Playbook community. Along with the AI RMF, the NIST 
Playbook will be part of the forthcoming Trustworthy and Responsible AI Resource Center.  
6.1. Govern 
The Govern function cultivates and implements a culture of risk management within 
organizations developing, deploying, or acquiring AI systems. Governance is designed to ensure 
risks and potential impacts are identified, measured, and managed effectively and consistently. 
Governance provides a structure through which AI risk management functions can align with 
organizational policies and strategic priorities whether or not they are related to AI systems. 
Governance focuses on technical aspects of AI system design and development as well as on 
organizational practices and competencies that directly affect the individuals involved in 
training, deploying, and monitoring of such systems. Governance should address supply chains, 
including third-party software or hardware systems and data as well as internally developed AI 
systems. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
19 
Govern is a cross-cutting function that is infused throughout AI risk management and informs 
the other functions of the process. Aspects of Govern, especially those related to compliance or 
evaluation, should be integrated into each of the other functions. Attention to governance is a 
continual and intrinsic requirement for effective AI risk management over an AI system’s 
lifespan and the organization’s hierarchy.  
Senior leadership sets the tone for risk management within an organization, and with it, 
organizational culture. The governing authorities determine the overarching policies that align 
with the organization’s mission, goals, values, and risk appetite as well as its culture. 
Management aligns the technical aspects of AI risk management to its policies and operations. 
Documentation should be used in transparency-enhancing and human review processes, and to 
bolster accountability in AI system teams.  
After putting in place the structures, systems, and teams described in the Govern function, 
Framework users should be better equipped to carry out meaningful risk management of AI 
products, services, and systems. It is incumbent on Framework users to continue to execute the 
Govern function as cultures, stakeholder needs and expectations, and knowledge evolve over 
time. 
Practices related to governing AI risks are described in the NIST AI RMF Playbook.  
Table 2 lists the Govern function’s categories and subcategories. 
Table 2: Categories and subcategories for the Govern function. 
Category 
Subcategory 
Govern: A culture of risk management is cultivated and present 
GOVERN 1: Policies, 
processes, procedures, and 
practices across the 
organization related to the 
mapping, measuring, and 
managing of AI risks are in 
place, transparent, and 
implemented effectively. 
GOVERN 1.1: Legal and regulatory requirements involving AI are 
understood, managed, and documented. 
GOVERN 1.2: The characteristics of trustworthy AI are integrated into 
organizational policies, processes, and procedures.  
GOVERN 1.3: The risk management process and its outcomes are 
established through transparent mechanisms and all significant risks as 
determined are measured. 
GOVERN 1.4: Ongoing monitoring and periodic review of the risk 
management process and its outcomes are planned, with organizational 
roles and responsibilities clearly defined. 
GOVERN 2: Accountability 
structures are in place so that 
the appropriate teams and 
individuals are empowered, 
responsible, and trained for 
mapping, measuring, and 
managing AI risks. 
GOVERN 2.1: Roles and responsibilities and lines of communication 
related to mapping, measuring, and managing AI risks are documented 
and are clear to individuals and teams throughout the organization. 
GOVERN 2.2: The organization’s personnel and partners are provided 
AI risk management training to enable them to perform their duties and 
responsibilities consistent with related policies, procedures, and 
agreements. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
20 
Category 
Subcategory 
GOVERN 2.3: Executive leadership of the organization considers 
decisions about risks associated with AI system development and 
deployment to be their responsibility. 
GOVERN 3: Workforce 
diversity, equity, inclusion, 
and accessibility processes are 
prioritized in the mapping, 
measuring, and managing of 
AI risks throughout the 
lifecycle. 
GOVERN 3.1: Decision-making related to mapping, measuring, and 
managing AI risks throughout the lifecycle is informed by a 
demographically and disciplinarily diverse team including internal and 
external personnel. Specifically, teams that are directly engaged with 
identifying design considerations and risks include a diversity of 
experience, expertise, and backgrounds to ensure AI systems meet 
requirements beyond a narrow subset of users.  
GOVERN 4: Organizational 
teams are committed to a 
culture that considers and 
communicates risk. 
GOVERN 4.1: Organizational practices are in place to foster a critical 
thinking and safety-first mindset in the design, development, and 
deployment of AI systems to minimize negative impacts. 
GOVERN 4.2: Organizational teams document the risks and impacts of 
the technology they design, develop, or deploy and communicate about 
the impacts more broadly. 
GOVERN 4.3: Organizational practices are in place to enable testing, 
identification of incidents, and information sharing.  
GOVERN 5: Processes are in 
place for robust stakeholder 
engagement. 
GOVERN 5.1: Organizational policies and practices are in place to 
collect, consider, prioritize, and integrate external stakeholder feedback 
regarding the potential individual and societal impacts related to AI risks. 
GOVERN 5.2: Mechanisms are established to enable AI actors to 
regularly incorporate adjudicated stakeholder feedback into system 
design and implementation.  
GOVERN 6: Policies and 
procedures are in place to 
address AI risks arising from 
third-party software and data 
and other supply chain issues. 
GOVERN 6.1: Policies and procedures are in place that address risks 
associated with third-party entities.  
GOVERN 6.2: Contingency processes are in place to handle failures or 
incidents in third-party data or AI systems deemed to be high-risk. 
6.2. Map 
The Map function establishes the context to frame risks related to an AI system. The information 
gathered while carrying out this function enables risk prevention and informs decisions for 
processes such as model management, and an initial decision about appropriateness or the need 
for an AI solution. Determination of whether AI use is appropriate or warranted can be 
considered in comparison to the status quo per a qualitative or quantitative analysis of benefits, 
costs, and risks. Outcomes in the Map function are the basis for the Measure and Manage 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
21 
functions. Without contextual knowledge, and awareness of risks within the identified contexts, 
risk management is difficult to perform. 
Implementing this function necessitates a broad set of perspectives from a diverse internal team 
and engagement with external stakeholders. Gathering broad perspectives can help organizations 
proactively prevent risks and develop more trustworthy AI systems, by 
» improving their capacity for understanding contexts;  
» checking their assumptions about context of use; 
» enabling recognition of when systems are not functional within or out of their intended 
context; 
» identifying positive and beneficial uses of their existing AI systems, and new markets; 
» improving understanding of limitations in processes such as proxy development; and 
» identifying constraints in real-world applications that may lead to negative impacts.  
After completing the Map function, Framework users should have sufficient contextual 
knowledge about AI system impacts to inform a go/no-go decision about whether to design, 
develop, or deploy an AI system based on an assessment of impacts. If a decision is made to 
proceed, organizations should utilize the Measure and Manage functions to assist in AI risk 
management efforts, utilizing policies and procedures put into place in the Govern function. It is 
incumbent on Framework users to continue applying the Map function to AI systems as context, 
capabilities, risks, benefits, and impacts evolve over time. 
Practices related to mapping AI risks are described in the NIST AI RMF Playbook.  
Table 3 lists the Map function’s categories and subcategories. 
Table 3: Categories and subcategories for the Map function.  
Category 
Subcategory 
Map: Context is recognized and risks related to the context are identified 
MAP 1: Context is established 
and understood. 
MAP 1.1: Intended purpose, prospective settings in which the AI system 
will be deployed, the specific set or types of users along with their 
expectations, and impacts of system use are understood and documented. 
Assumptions and related limitations about AI system purpose and use are 
enumerated, documented, and tied to TEVV considerations and system 
metrics.  
MAP 1.2: Inter-disciplinary AI actors, competencies, skills, and capacities 
for establishing context reflect demographic diversity and broad domain 
and user experience expertise, and their participation is documented. 
Opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration are prioritized. 
MAP 1.3: The business value or context of business use has been clearly 
defined or – in the case of assessing existing AI systems – re-evaluated.  
MAP 1.4: The organization’s mission and relevant goals for the AI 
technology are understood. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
22 
Category 
Subcategory 
MAP 1.5: Organizational risk tolerances are determined.  
MAP 1.6: Practices and personnel for design activities enable regular 
engagement with stakeholders, and integrate actionable user and 
community feedback about unanticipated negative impacts.  
MAP 1.7: System requirements (e.g., “the system shall respect the privacy 
of its users”) are elicited and understood from stakeholders. Design 
decisions take socio-technical implications into account to address AI risks. 
MAP 2: Classification of the 
AI system is performed. 
MAP 2.1: The specific task, and methods used to implement the task, that 
the AI system will support is defined (e.g., classifiers, generative models, 
recommenders). 
MAP 2.2: Information is documented about the system’s knowledge limits 
and how output will be utilized and overseen by humans. 
MAP 2.3: Scientific integrity and TEVV considerations are identified and 
documented, including those related to experimental design, data collection 
and selection (e.g., availability, representativeness, suitability), and 
construct validation. 
MAP 3: AI capabilities, 
targeted usage, goals, and 
expected benefits and costs 
compared with the status quo 
are understood. 
MAP 3.1: Benefits of intended system functionality and performance are 
examined and documented. 
MAP 3.2: Potential costs, including non-monetary costs, which result from 
expected or realized errors or system performance are examined and 
documented. 
MAP 3.3: Targeted application scope is specified, narrowed, and 
documented based on established context and AI system classification. 
MAP 4: Risks and benefits are 
mapped for third-party 
software and data. 
MAP 4.1: Approaches for mapping third-party technology risks are in 
place and documented. 
MAP 4.2: Internal risk controls for third-party technology risks are in place 
and documented. 
MAP 5: Impacts to 
individuals, groups, 
communities, organizations, 
and society are assessed. 
MAP 5.1: Potential positive and negative impacts to individuals, groups, 
communities, organizations, and society are regularly identified and 
documented. 
MAP 5.2: Likelihood and magnitude of each identified impact based on 
expected use, past uses of AI systems in similar contexts, public incident 
reports, stakeholder feedback, or other data are identified and documented. 
MAP 5.3: Assessments of benefits versus impacts are based on analyses of 
impact, magnitude, and likelihood of risk.  
 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
23 
6.3. Measure 
The Measure function employs quantitative, qualitative, or mixed-method tools, techniques, and 
methodologies to analyze, assess, benchmark, and monitor AI risk and related impacts. It uses 
knowledge relevant to AI risks identified in the Map function and informs the Manage function. 
AI systems should be tested before their deployment and regularly while in operation. 
Measuring AI risks includes tracking metrics for trustworthy characteristics, social impact, and 
human-AI configurations. Processes developed or adopted in the Measure function should 
include rigorous software testing and performance assessment methodologies that include 
associated measures of uncertainty, comparisons to performance benchmarks, and formalized 
reporting and documentation of results. Independent review improves the effectiveness of testing 
and can mitigate internal biases and potential conflicts of interest. 
Where tradeoffs among the trustworthy characteristics arise, measurement provides a traceable 
basis to inform management decisions. Options may include recalibration, impact mitigation, or 
removal of the system from production. 
After completing the Measure function, TEVV processes including metrics, methods, and 
methodologies are in place, followed, and documented. Framework users will enhance their 
capacity to comprehensively evaluate system trustworthiness, identify and track existing and 
emergent risks, and verify efficacy of metrics. Measurement outcomes will be utilized in the 
Manage function to assist risk monitoring and response efforts. It is incumbent on Framework 
users to continue applying the Measure function to AI systems as knowledge, methodologies, 
risks, and impacts evolve over time. 
Practices related to measuring AI risks will be described in the NIST AI RMF Playbook.  
Table 4 lists the Measure function’s categories and subcategories. 
Table 4: Categories and subcategories for the Measure function. 
Category 
Subcategory 
Measure: Identified risks are assessed, analyzed, or tracked  
MEASURE 1: Appropriate 
methods and metrics are 
identified and applied. 
 
MEASURE 1.1: Approaches and metrics for quantitative or qualitative 
measurement of the most significant risks, identified by the outcome of the 
Map function, including context-relevant measures of trustworthiness are 
identified and selected for implementation. The risks or trustworthiness 
characteristics that will not be measured are properly documented. 
MEASURE 1.2: Appropriateness of metrics and effectiveness of existing 
controls is regularly assessed and updated. 
MEASURE 1.3: Internal experts who did not serve as front-line developers 
for the system and/or independent assessors are involved in regular 
assessments and updates. Domain experts, users, and external stakeholders 
and affected communities are consulted in support of assessments. 
MEASURE 2.1: Test sets, metrics, and details about the tools used during 
test, evaluation, validation, and verification (TEVV) are documented. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
24 
Category 
Subcategory 
MEASURE 2: Systems are 
evaluated for trustworthy 
characteristics. 
MEASURE 2.2: Evaluations involving human subjects comply with human 
subject protection requirements; and human subjects or datasets are 
representative of the intended population.  
MEASURE 2.3: System performance or assurance criteria are measured 
qualitatively or quantitatively and demonstrated for conditions similar to 
deployment setting(s). Measures are documented. 
MEASURE 2.4: Deployed product is demonstrated to be valid and reliable. 
Limitations of the generalizability beyond the conditions under which the 
technology was developed are documented.  
MEASURE 2.5: AI system is evaluated regularly for safety. Deployed 
product is demonstrated to be safe and can fail safely and gracefully if it is 
made to operate beyond its knowledge limits. Safety metrics implicate 
system reliability and robustness, real-time monitoring, and response times 
for AI system failures. 
MEASURE 2.6: Computational bias is evaluated regularly and results are 
documented.  
MEASURE 2.7: AI system resilience and security is evaluated regularly 
and documented.  
MEASURE 2.8: AI model is explained, validated, and documented. AI 
system output is interpreted within its context and to inform responsible use 
and governance. 
MEASURE 2.9: Privacy risk of the AI system is examined regularly and 
documented.  
MEASURE 2.10: Environmental impact and sustainability of model 
training and management activities are assessed and documented. 
MEASURE 3: Mechanisms 
for tracking identified risks 
over time are in place.  
MEASURE 3.1: Approaches, personnel, and documentation are in place to 
regularly identify and track existing and emergent risks based on factors 
such as intended and actual performance in deployed contexts. 
MEASURE 3.2: Risk tracking approaches are considered for settings where 
risks are difficult to assess using currently available measurement 
techniques or are not yet available.  
MEASURE 4: Feedback 
about efficacy of 
measurement is gathered and 
assessed. 
MEASURE 4.1: Measurement approaches for identifying risks are 
connected to deployment context(s) and informed through consultation 
with domain experts and other end users. Approaches are documented. 
MEASURE 4.2: Measurement results regarding system trustworthiness in 
deployment context(s) are informed by domain expert and other 
stakeholder feedback to validate whether the system is performing 
consistently as intended. Results are documented. 
MEASURE 4.3: Measurable performance improvements (e.g., participatory 
methods) based on stakeholder consultations are identified and 
documented. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
25 
6.4. Manage  
The Manage function entails allocating risk management resources to mapped and measured 
risks on a regular basis and as defined by the Govern function.  
Contextual information gleaned from stakeholder feedback and other expert consultation 
processes established in Govern and carried out in Map are also utilized in this function to 
decrease the likelihood of system failures and negative impacts. Systematic documentation 
practices established in Govern and utilized in Map and Measure bolster AI risk management 
efforts and increase transparency and accountability. 
After completing the Manage function, plans for prioritizing risk and continuous monitoring and 
improvement will be in place. Framework users will have enhanced capacity to manage the risks 
of deployed AI systems and to allocate risk management resources based on risk measures. It is 
incumbent on Framework users to continue to apply the Manage function to deployed AI 
systems as methods, contexts, risks, and stakeholder expectations evolve over time. 
Practices related to managing AI risks will be described in the NIST AI RMF Playbook.  
Table 5 lists the Manage function’s categories and subcategories. 
Table 5: Categories and subcategories for the Manage function.  
Category 
Subcategory 
Manage: Risks are prioritized and acted upon based on a projected impact 
MANAGE 1: AI risks based 
on impact assessments and 
other analytical output from 
the Map and Measure 
functions are prioritized, 
responded to, and managed.   
MANAGE 1.1: Determination is made about whether the AI system 
achieves its intended purpose and stated objectives and should 
proceed in development or deployment. 
MANAGE 1.2: Treatment of documented risks is prioritized based 
on impact, likelihood, and available resources methods. 
MANAGE 1.3: Responses to the most significant risks, identified 
by the Map function, are developed, planned, and documented. 
Risk response options can include mitigating, transferring, sharing, 
avoiding, or accepting.  
MANAGE 2: Strategies to 
maximize benefits and 
minimize negative impacts 
are planned, prepared, 
implemented, and 
documented, and informed by 
stakeholder input. 
MANAGE 2.1: Resources required to manage risks are taken into 
account, along with viable alternative systems, approaches, or 
methods, and related reduction in severity of impact or likelihood 
of each potential action. 
MANAGE 2.2: Mechanisms are in place and applied to sustain the 
value of deployed AI systems. 
MANAGE 2.3: Mechanisms are in place and applied to supersede, 
disengage, or deactivate AI systems that demonstrate performance 
or outcomes inconsistent with intended use. 
MANAGE 3: Risks from 
third-party entities are 
managed. 
MANAGE 3.1: Risks from third-party resources are regularly 
monitored, and risk controls are applied and documented. 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
26 
Category 
Subcategory 
MANAGE 4: Responses to 
identified and measured risks 
are documented and 
monitored regularly. 
MANAGE 4.1: Post-deployment system monitoring plans are 
implemented, including mechanisms for capturing and evaluating 
user and stakeholder feedback, appeal and override, 
decommissioning, incident response, and change management. 
MANAGE 4.2: Measurable continuous improvement activities are 
integrated into system updates and include regular stakeholder 
engagement.  
7. AI RMF Profiles 
AI RMF use case profiles are instantiations of the AI RMF functions, categories, and 
subcategories for a certain application or use case based on the requirements, risk tolerance, and 
resources of the Framework user. Examples could be an AI RMF hiring profile or an AI RMF 
fair housing profile. Profiles may illustrate and offer insights into how risk can be managed at 
various stages of the AI lifecycle or in specific sector, technology, or end-use applications. A 
profile assists organizations in deciding how they might best manage AI risk that is well-aligned 
with their goals, considers legal/regulatory requirements and best practices, and reflects risk 
management priorities.  
AI RMF temporal profiles are descriptions of either the current state or the desired, target state 
of specific AI risk management activities within a given sector, industry, organization, or 
application context. An AI RMF Current Profile indicates how AI is currently being managed 
and the related risks in terms of current outcomes. A Target Profile indicates the outcomes 
needed to achieve the desired or target AI risk management goals.  
Comparing Current and Target Profiles may reveal gaps to be addressed to meet AI risk 
management objectives. Action plans can be developed to address these gaps to fulfill a given 
Category or Subcategory. Prioritizing the mitigation of gaps is driven by the user’s needs and 
risk management processes. This risk-based approach enables Framework users to compare their 
approaches and themselves with other stakeholders and to gauge the resources needed (e.g., 
staffing, funding) to achieve AI risk management goals in a cost-effective, prioritized manner. 
This Framework does not prescribe Profile templates, allowing for flexibility in implementation. 
NOTE: NIST welcomes contributions towards development of AI RMF use case profiles as well 
as current and target profiles. Submissions to be included in the NIST Trustworthy and 
Responsible AI Resource Center will inform NIST and the broader community about the 
usefulness of the AI RMF and will likely lead to improvements which can be incorporated into 
future versions of the framework. 
 
 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
27 
Appendix A: Descriptions of AI Actor Tasks from 
Figure 1 
AI Design includes AI actors who are responsible for the planning, design, and data collection 
and processing tasks of the AI system. Tasks include articulating and documenting the system’s 
concept and objectives, underlying assumptions, context, and requirements; gathering and 
cleaning data; and documenting the metadata and characteristics of the dataset. AI actors in this 
category include data scientists, domain experts, socio-cultural analysts, human factors experts, 
governance experts, data engineers, data providers, and evaluators. 
AI Development includes AI actors who are responsible for model building and interpretation 
tasks, which involve the creation, selection, calibration, training, and/or testing of models or 
algorithms. Tasks involve machine learning experts, data scientists, developers, and experts with 
familiarity about the socio-cultural and contextual factors associated with the deployment setting. 
AI Deployment includes AI actors who assure deployment of the system into production. 
Related tasks include: piloting, checking compatibility with legacy systems, ensuring regulatory 
compliance, managing organizational change, and evaluating user experience. AI actors in this 
category include system integrators, software developers, evaluators and domain experts with 
expertise in human factors, socio-cultural analysis, and governance. 
Operation and Monitoring includes AI actors who are responsible for operating the AI system 
and working with others to continuously assess system output and impacts. Users who interpret 
or incorporate the output of AI systems, evaluators and auditors, and members of the research 
community are part of this group. 
Test, Evaluation, Verification, and Validation (TEVV) tasks are performed by AI actors who 
examine the AI system or its components, or detect and remediate problems throughout the AI 
lifecycle. Tasks can be incorporated into a phase as early as design, where tests are planned in 
accordance with the design requirement.  
● TEVV tasks for design, planning, and data may center on internal and external validation 
of assumptions for system design, data collection, and measurements, relative to the 
intended context of deployment or application.  
● TEVV tasks for development (i.e., model building) include model validation and 
assessment.  
● TEVV tasks for deployment include system validation and integration in production, with 
testing, tuning, and recalibration for systems and process integration, user experience, 
and compliance with existing legal, regulatory, and ethical specifications.  
● TEVV tasks for operations involve ongoing monitoring for periodic updates, testing, and 
recalibration of models, and the detection of emergent properties and related impacts.  


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
28 
Human Factors tasks and activities include human-centered design practices and 
methodologies, promoting the active involvement of end-users and appropriate stakeholders, 
incorporating context-specific norms and values in system design (VSD), evaluating and 
adapting end-user experiences, and broad integration of humans and human dynamics in all 
phases of the AI lifecycle. Human factors professionals provide multidisciplinary skills and 
perspectives to understand context of use, engage multi-stakeholder processes, design and 
evaluate user experience (UI/UX), perform human-centered evaluation and testing, and inform 
impact assessments. 
Domain Experts are multidisciplinary practitioners or scholars who provide knowledge or 
expertise in an industry sector, economic sector, or application area where an AI system is being 
used. These experts are essential contributors for AI system design and development and can 
provide interpretation of outputs to support the work of TEVV and AI impact assessment teams.  
AI Impact Assessors are responsible for assessing and evaluating requirements for AI system 
accountability, combating harmful bias, examining intended and unintended impacts of AI 
systems, product safety, liability, and security, among others. AI Impact assessors provide 
technical, human factor, socio-cultural, and legal expertise. 
Procurers are financial, legal, or policy management officials who acquire AI models, products, 
or services from a third party, developer, vendor, or contractor. 
Third-party entities are providers, developers, or vendors of data, algorithms, models, and/or 
systems and related services to another organization or the organization’s customers or clients. 
Third-party entities are responsible for AI design and development tasks, in whole or in part. By 
definition, they are external to the design, development, or deployment team of the organization 
that acquires its technologies or services. The technologies acquired from third-party entities 
may be complex or opaque, and risk tolerances may not align with the deploying or operating 
organization.  
Organizational Management, Senior Leadership, and the Board of Directors are among the 
parties responsible for AI governance. 
End Users of an AI system are the individuals or groups that use the system for a specific 
purpose. These individuals or groups interact with an AI system in a specific context. End users 
can range in competency from AI experts to first-time technology end-users. 
AI Operators continuously assess system recommendations and impacts (both intended and 
unintended) in light of the system’s objectives as well as the ethical considerations that go into 
its operation. Operators can often be associated with the planning and design or specification 
stage of the AI system lifecycle as well as post-deployment monitoring.  
Affected Individuals/Communities encompass any individual, group, community, or 
stakeholder organization affected by AI systems or decisions based on the output of AI systems, 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
29 
directly or indirectly. These individuals do not necessarily interact with the system and can be 
indirectly or directly affected by the deployment of an AI system or application. 
Other AI actors may provide formal or quasi-formal norms or guidance for specifying and 
managing AI risks. They can include trade groups, standards developing organizations, 
advocacy groups, environmental groups, and civil society organizations.  
The general public is most likely to directly experience positive and negative impacts of AI 
technologies. They may provide the motivation for actions taken by the other stakeholders and 
can include individuals, communities, and consumers in the context where an AI system is 
developed or deployed. 
 
 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
30 
Appendix B: How AI Risks Differ from Traditional 
Software Risks 
As with traditional software, risks from AI-based technology can be bigger than an enterprise, 
span organizations, and can lead to societal impacts. AI systems also bring a set of risks that are 
not comprehensively addressed by current risk frameworks and approaches. Some AI systems’ 
features that present risks can also be beneficial. For example, pre-trained models and transfer 
learning can advance research and increase accuracy and resilience when compared to other 
models and approaches. Identifying contextual factors in the Map function will assist AI actors 
in determining the level of risk and potential management efforts. 
Compared to traditional software, AI-specific risks that are new or increased include:  
» 
“Oracle problem” - the data used for building an AI system is considered oracle, but data may 
not be a true or appropriate representation of the context or intended use of the AI system. 
Additionally, bias and other data quality issues can affect AI system trustworthiness, which 
could lead to negative impacts. 
» AI system dependency and reliance on data for training tasks, combined with increased 
volume and complexity typically associated with such data.  
» Intentional or unintentional changes during training that may fundamentally alter AI system 
performance. 
» Datasets used to train AI systems may become detached from their original and intended 
context, or may become stale or outdated relative to deployment context. 
» AI system scale and complexity (many systems contain billions or even trillions of decision 
points) housed within more traditional software applications.  
» Use of pre-trained models that can advance research and improve performance can also 
increase levels of statistical uncertainty and cause issues with bias management, scientific 
validity, and reproducibility.  
» Higher degree of difficulty in predicting failure modes for emergent properties of large-scale 
pre-trained models.  
» Increased opacity and concerns about reproducibility. 
» Underdeveloped software testing standards. 
» Computational costs for developing AI systems and their impact on the environment and 
planet.  
 
Current standard privacy and security controls are not able to comprehensively address many of 
these AI system risks. Existing privacy, computer security, and data security frameworks and 
guidance are unable to: 
» adequately manage the problem of bias in AI systems; 
» comprehensively address security concerns related to evasion, model extraction, membership 
inference, or other machine learning attacks; 


AI RMF 2nd Draft for public comment by September 29, 2022 
31 
» address the complex attack surface of AI systems or other security abuses enabled by AI 
systems; and 
» address risks associated with third-party AI technologies, transfer learning, and off-label use, 
where AI systems may be trained for decision-making outside an organization’s security 
controls or trained in one domain and then “fine-tuned” for another.   
 
Perceptions about AI system capabilities can be another source of risk. One major false 
perception is the presumption that AI systems work – and work well – in all settings.  
Whether accurate or not, AI is often portrayed in public discourse as more objective than 
humans, and with greater capabilities than general software. Additionally, since systemic biases 
can be encoded in AI system training data and individual and group decision making across the 
AI lifecycle, many of the negative system impacts can be concentrated on historically excluded 
groups. 
