i   Main title here: Subhead title goes here
DC Section 200
2018 Description Criteria for 
a Description of a Service 
Organization’s System in a 
SOC 2® Report (with Revised 
Implementation Guidance – 2022)


Page 1 
DC Section 200 
2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization’s System in 
a SOC 2® Report (With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022) 
Prepared by the AICPA Assurance Services Executive Committee’s SOC 2 Working Group 
Notice to Readers 
The 2018 Description Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization’s System in a SOC 2® Report 
(With Revised Implementation Guidance — 2022) (2018 description criteria) presents description criteria 
established by the Assurance Services Executive Committee (ASEC) of the AICPA for use by service 
organization management when preparing the description of the service organization’s system and by 
the service auditors when evaluating whether the description is presented in accordance with the descrip-
tion criteria in a SOC 2 examination.  
In developing and establishing these criteria, ASEC followed due process procedures, including expo-
sure of criteria for public comment. BL section 360R, Implementing Resolutions Under Section 3.6 
Committees, fn 1  designates ASEC as a senior technical committee with the authority to make public 
statements without clearance from the AICPA Council or the board of directors. Paragraph .A46 of AT-
C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engagements, fn 2  indicates that criteria promulgated 
by a body designated by the Council of the AICPA under the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct are, 
by definition, considered suitable.  
Revisions in This Version 
This version of the 2018 description criteria has been modified to reflect revisions to the implementation 
guidance relevant to certain of the description criteria. As discussed in the introduction section, imple-
mentation guidance presents important factors to consider when making judgments about the nature and 
extent of disclosures called for by each criterion.  
The revisions to the implementation guidance discussed in this notice to readers do not in any way 
alter the criteria in the 2018 description criteria. Such criteria continue to be suitable criteria for 
use when evaluating the description of a system in a SOC 2 engagement.     
fn 1 All BL sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards. 
fn 2 All AT-C sections can be found in AICPA Professional Standards. 


 
Page 2 
Revisions to the implementation guidance were developed by ASEC’s SOC 2 Working Group; all were 
reviewed by the ASEC chair. The revised implementation guidance in this version is intended to provide 
users of the criteria with the following:   
• Additional clarity regarding certain disclosure requirements 
• Guidance on disclosure of how controls meet the requirements of a process or control framework 
• Guidance on disclosure of information about the risk assessment process and specific risks 
Introduction 
.01  
The AICPA’s Assurance Services Executive Committee (ASEC), through its Trust Information Integrity 
Task Force’s SOC 2 Working Group, has developed a set of benchmarks, known as description criteria, 
to be used when preparing and evaluating the description of the service organization’s system (descrip-
tion) in an examination of a service organization’s controls over security, availability, processing integ-
rity, confidentiality, or privacy (SOC 2 examination). This document presents the description criteria for 
use in that examination. (This document does not address the AICPA’s trust services criteria, fn 3  which 
are used in a SOC 2 examination to evaluate whether controls stated in the description were suitably de-
signed and operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service 
commitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria.) 
.02  
Applying the description criteria requires judgment. Therefore, in addition to the description criteria, this 
document also presents implementation guidance for each criterion. The implementation guidance pre-
sents factors to consider when making judgments about the nature and extent of disclosures called for by 
each criterion. This guidance does not address all possible situations; therefore, users should carefully 
consider the facts and circumstances of the service organization and its environment when applying the 
description criteria.  
 
Applicability and Use of the Description Criteria 
SOC 2 Examination 
.03  
The description criteria presented in this document were developed to be used in conjunction with the 
SOC 2 examination described in the AICPA Guide SOC 2© Reporting on an Examination of Controls at 
a Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Pri-
vacy (guide). The SOC 2 examination is performed in accordance with AT-C section 105, Concepts 
Common to All Attestation Engagements, and AT-C section 205, Assertion-Based Examination 
 
fn 3 The 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised 
Points of Focus — 2022) are codified in TSP section 100 in AICPA Trust Services Criteria.  
 


 
Page 3 
Engagements. In that examination, the CPA (known as a service auditor) fn 4 expresses an opinion about 
the following: 
a. Whether the description is presented in accordance with the description criteria 
b. Whether the controls were suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the service or-
ganization’s service commitments and system requirements would be achieved if controls oper-
ated effectively based on the applicable trust services criteria 
c. In a type 2 examination, fn 5 whether the controls operated effectively to provide reasonable assur-
ance that the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements were 
achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria fn 6  
.04  
A SOC 2 examination is predicated on the concept that, because service organization management is 
ultimately responsible for developing, implementing, and operating the service organization’s system, 
service organization management is also responsible for developing and presenting in the SOC 2 report 
a description of the service organization’s system. Service organization management uses the descrip-
tion criteria in this document when preparing the description of the service organization’s system; the 
service auditor uses the criteria when evaluating whether the description is presented in accordance with 
the description criteria. 
Suitability and Availability of the Description Criteria 
.05  
The attestation standards define the attributes of suitable criteria for an examination engagement. In a 
SOC 2 examination, the attributes of suitable criteria are as follows: fn 7  
 
fn 4 In the attestation standards, a CPA performing an attestation engagement ordinarily is referred to as a practitioner. However, 
AICPA Guide SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Pro-
cessing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy uses the term service auditor, rather than practitioner, to refer to a CPA reporting on 
controls at a service organization. Therefore, this document also uses the term service auditor.  
fn 5 There are two types of SOC 2 examinations (type 1 and type 2), and the subject matters vary depending on which type of exami-
nation the service auditor performs. The subject matters of a type 1 examination are (a) the description and (b) the suitability of the 
design of the controls to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements 
would be achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. The subject matters in a type 2 examination are (a) the description, 
(b) the suitability of design of the controls to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commitments and 
system requirements would be achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, and (c) the operating effectiveness of controls 
to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on 
the applicable trust services criteria. 
fn 6  This term refers to the trust services criteria in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Pro-
cessing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022), that pertain to the category or categories in-
cluded within the scope of the particular examination. 
fn 7 Paragraph .A44 of AT-C section 105, Concepts Common to All Attestation Engagements. 


 
Page 4 
• Relevance. Criteria are relevant to the system. 
• Objectivity. Criteria are free from bias. 
• Measurability. Criteria permit reasonably consistent measurements, qualitative or quantitative, of 
the system. 
• Completeness. Criteria are complete when the description prepared in accordance with them does 
not omit relevant factors that could reasonably be expected to affect users’ decisions made on the 
basis of that description. 
.06  
In addition to being suitable, AT-C section 105 fn 8  indicates that the criteria used in an attestation en-
gagement should be available to report users. The publication of the description criteria makes the crite-
ria available to report users. Accordingly, ASEC has concluded that the description criteria presented in 
this document are suitable and available for use in a SOC 2 examination.  
Preparing and Evaluating the Presentation of the Description of the Service Organiza-
tion’s System in Accordance With the Description Criteria 
.07  
Service organization management is responsible for the design, implementation, and operation of con-
trols within the system used to provide services to user entities and business partners. In a SOC 2 exami-
nation, a description of the service organization’s system presented in accordance with the description 
criteria is designed to enable user entities, business partners, and other intended users of the SOC 2 re-
port (known collectively as report users) to understand the service organization’s system, including the 
processing and flow of data and information through and from the system. The description describes the 
procedures and controls the service organization has implemented to manage the risks that threaten the 
achievement of the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements. The descrip-
tion is prepared by service organization management from documentation supporting the system of in-
ternal control and system operations, as well as consideration of the policies, processes, and procedures 
within the system used to provide the services. 
.08  
A SOC 2 report is intended for use by those who have sufficient knowledge and understanding of the 
service organization, the services it provides, and the system used to provide those services, among other 
matters. As a result, when drafting the description, service organization management can assume that 
users have such knowledge and understanding. Furthermore, if the users do not have such knowledge 
and understanding, they are likely to misunderstand the content of the SOC 2 report, the assertions made 
by management, and the service auditor’s opinion, all of which are included in the report. For that rea-
son, management and the service auditor should agree on the intended users of the report (referred to as 
specified parties). Specified parties of a SOC 2 report may include service organization personnel, user 
entities of the system throughout some or all of the period, business partners subject to risks arising from 
 
fn 8 Paragraph .27b of AT-C section 105. 
 


 
Page 5 
interactions with the system, practitioners providing services to user entities and business partners, pro-
spective user entities and business partners, and regulators who have sufficient knowledge and under-
standing of such matters.  
.09  
Though the description is generally narrative in nature, there is no prescribed format for the description.  
the description Service organization management may organize the description in a variety of different 
ways, provided that disclosures called for by these criteria are included. For example, the description 
may be organized by components of internal control (the control environment, risk assessment process, 
control activities, monitoring activities, and information and communications). Alternatively, it may be 
organized by components of the system (infrastructure, software, people, procedures, and data). Man-
agement may also use other logical groupings of information in organizing its system description, in-
cluding the use of recognized industry frameworks or standards based on management’s objectives. For 
example, the system description may be organized by control families or control objectives listed in a 
process or control framework.  
.10  
Regardless of the method used to organize the system description, it is supplemented by disclosures of 
the aspects of the internal control components relevant to the identification and assessment of risks that 
would prevent the service organization from achieving its service commitments and system require-
ments and by disclosures of the design, implementation, and operation of controls to address those risks. 
Although not required, it is good practice to map the controls listed back to the relevant criteria in each 
of the trust services categories to more clearly demonstrate how the service organization's service com-
mitments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria. 
Flowcharts, matrixes, tables, graphics, context diagrams, or a combination thereof may be used to sup-
plement the narratives contained within the description.  
.11  
The extent of disclosures included in the description may vary depending on the size and complexity of 
the service organization and its activities. In addition, the description need not address every aspect of 
the service organization’s system or the services provided by the system. For example, although the ser-
vice organization may use both manual and automated systems to provide services to user entities, the 
description need not necessarily disclose every step in that process. Furthermore, if certain aspects of 
those services are not relevant to report users or are beyond the scope of the SOC 2 examination, the de-
scription need not address them. For example, disclosures about a service organization’s processes re-
lated to billing for services provided to user entities are unlikely to be relevant to report users.  
.12  
Ordinarily, a description of a service organization’s system in a SOC 2 examination is presented in ac-
cordance with the description criteria when it (a) describes the system that the service organization has 
implemented (that is, placed in operation) to provide the services, (b) includes information about each 
description criterion, to the extent it is relevant to the system being described, and (c) does not inadvert-
ently or intentionally omit or distort information that is likely to be relevant to report users’ decisions. 
The description should be prepared at a level of detail that balances the need of report users to under-
stand the nature of the risks faced by the service organization, and the impact of the realization of those 
risks, with the possibility of a hostile party using that information to identify potential vulnerabilities of 
the system, thereby compromising the service organization’s ability to achieve its service commitments 
and system requirements. Nevertheless, the description should include disclosures about each descrip-
tion criterion at a level that does not omit information that would be considered significant by report us-
ers. 


 
Page 6 
.13  
A description is not presented in accordance with the description criteria if it (a) states or implies that 
certain IT components exist when they do not, (b) states or implies that certain processes and controls 
have been implemented when they are not being performed, or (c) contains statements that cannot be 
objectively evaluated (for example, advertising puffery). 
.14  
In certain circumstances, additional disclosures may be necessary to supplement the description. Man-
agement’s decisions about whether such additional disclosures are necessary and the service auditor’s 
evaluation of management’s decisions involve consideration of whether the disclosures may affect infor-
mation that is likely to be relevant to the decisions of report users. Additional disclosures that may be 
necessary include the following:  
• Significant interpretations made in applying the description criteria in the specific circumstances 
of the SOC 2 examination (for example, what constitutes a security event or incident) 
• Subsequent events, depending on their nature and significance 
 
Materiality Considerations When Preparing and Evaluating Whether the Description Is 
Presented in Accordance With the Description Criteria 
.15  
As discussed in paragraph .02, applying the description criteria requires judgment. One of those judg-
ments involves the informational needs of report users. Most SOC 2 reports have a broad range of speci-
fied parties. Therefore, the description is intended to meet the common informational needs of the speci-
fied parties and does not ordinarily include information about every aspect of the system that may be 
considered important to each individual report user. However, an understanding of the perspectives and 
information needs of the broad range of intended SOC 2 report users is necessary to determine whether 
the description is presented in accordance with the description criteria and is sufficient to meet report 
users’ needs.  
.16  
When evaluating whether the description is in accordance with the description criteria, management 
considers whether there is substantial likelihood that misstatements or omissions in the description, indi-
vidually or in the aggregate, would influence the judgments made by specified parties to the SOC 2 re-
port. For example, in a SOC 2 examination on controls relevant to privacy, management may discover 
that it has failed to describe a principal service commitment involving compliance with the European 
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) when compliance is required by law. Because 
there is substantial likelihood that such information would influence the judgments made by SOC 2 re-
port users, management may conclude that the omission of such information may affect the decisions of 


 
Page 7 
such users. In that case, management would amend the description by including the relevant infor-
mation. fn 9  
.17  
Because the description criteria call for disclosure of primarily nonfinancial information, most descrip-
tions will be presented in narrative form. Therefore, materiality considerations are mainly qualitative in 
nature and center around whether there are misstatements in information that have a substantial likeli-
hood of influencing the judgments made by report users, including the possibility that relevant infor-
mation has been omitted. Qualitative factors to be considered include the following: 
• The interaction between and relative importance of individual disclosures within the description. 
• The wording used to make required disclosures; for example, the wording chosen does not omit 
or distort the disclosures presented. 
• Whether the characteristics of the presentation are appropriate because the description criteria 
allow for variations in presentation. 
• The extent to which identified deficiencies in the suitability of design or the operating effective-
ness of controls contradict the disclosures about controls included in the description.   
• The effect of a misstatement or potential misstatement on the description as a whole. 
• Whether a misstatement affects compliance with laws or regulations. 
Description Criteria for a Description of a Service Organization’s System in a SOC 2 Ex-
amination and Related Implementation Guidance 
.18  
To be presented in accordance with the description criteria, a description ordinarily needs to disclose 
information about each of the requirements (criteria) presented in the left column of the following table, 
to the extent that the criterion is applicable to the system and the trust services categories included 
within the scope of the examination. (Materiality considerations are discussed in the previous section 
beginning at paragraph .15.) 
.19  
The implementation guidance in the right column of the following table presents factors to consider 
when making judgments about the nature and extent of disclosures called for by each criterion. The im-
plementation guidance does not address all possible situations; therefore, service organization manage-
ment is advised to carefully consider the specific facts and circumstances of the service organization and 
 
fn 9 If the description has been prepared to meet the informational needs of a specific subset of SOC 2 report users (and the report is 
restricted to those specific users), management considers whether there is a substantial likelihood that misstatements (including omis-
sions) would influence the judgments made by that specific subset of report users.  
 


 
Page 8 
the nature of the services provided when applying the description criteria in a SOC 2 examination. Illus-
trative disclosures can be found on the AICPA website. 


 
Page 9 
 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
The description contains the following infor-
mation: 
When making judgments about the nature and extent of disclosures to include about this cri-
terion, consider the following: 
DC1: The types of services provided 
Examples of the types of services provided by service organizations are as follows:  
• Customer support. Providing customers of user entities with online or telephonic post-
sales support and service management. Examples of these services are warranty inquir-
ies and investigating and responding to customer complaints. 
• Health care claims management and processing. Providing medical providers, em-
ployers, third-party administrators, and insured parties of employers with systems that 
enable medical records and related health insurance claims to be processed accurately, 
securely, and confidentially. 
• Enterprise IT outsourcing services. Managing, operating, and maintaining user enti-
ties’ IT data centers, infrastructure, and application systems and related functions that 
support IT activities, such as network, production, security, change management, hard-
ware, and environmental control activities. 
• Managed security. Managing access to networks and computing systems for user enti-
ties (for example, granting access to a system and preventing, or detecting and mitigat-
ing, system intrusion). 
 
fn 10 In addition to the numbered criteria, the discussion in paragraphs 1–19 is relevant when implementing the criteria in preparing a description or evaluating whether the descrip-
tion is presented in accordance with the description criteria. 
 


 
Page 10 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
• Financial technology services. Providing financial services companies with IT-based 
transaction processing services. Examples of such transactions are loan processing, 
peer-to-peer lending, payment processing, retirement recordkeeping, crowdfunding, 
big data analytics, and investment management. 
• Environmental, social, and governance (ESG) metric services. Measuring, calculating, 
and otherwise assisting companies with gathering and reporting their ESG metrics. 
To be useful to report users, the description should clearly identify the services that are the 
focus of the SOC 2 examination.  
When handling personal information, a service organization may function in the role of a 
data processor, data controller, or both. Depending on which of these roles the service organi-
zation performs, its responsibilities with regard to protecting personal information may dif-
fer. Therefore, when the SOC 2 examination addresses privacy, clear disclosure of the role or 
roles performed by the service organization may be necessary to describe the types of ser-
vices provided. Such disclosures enable users to understand how the service organization ad-
dressed its responsibilities to mitigate risks to the achievement of its service commitments 
and system requirements related to privacy.  
DC2: The principal service commitments and sys-
tem requirements 
A service organization adopts a mission and vision, sets strategies, and establishes objectives 
to help it meet its mission and vision based on its strategies. Management designs and imple-
ments individual systems to achieve specific objectives and designs and implements controls 
within the system to mitigate the risks that threaten the service organization’s achievement of 
those objectives. The service organization’s objectives for its services and the system used to 
deliver those services are embodied in the service commitments it makes to user entities and 
the requirements it establishes for the functioning of the system used to deliver those services 
(service commitments and system requirements). Disclosure of the principal service commit-
ments and system requirements enables report users to understand the objectives that drive 
the operation of the system and how the applicable trust services criteria were used to 


 
Page 11 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
evaluate whether controls were suitably designed and operated effectively. Service commit-
ments and system requirements relate primarily to the following: 
a. The achievement of the service commitments made to user entities related to the sys-
tem used to provide the services and the system requirements necessary to achieve 
those commitments 
b. Compliance with laws and regulations regarding the provision of the services by the 
system 
c. The achievement of the other objectives the service organization has for the system, 
including those relating to implementation of controls to meet the requirements of a 
process or control framework (For example, a service organization that does business 
with government agencies may make a commitment to implement controls to meet the 
requirements of the National Institute of Standards and Technology [NIST] Cybersecu-
rity Framework.) 
The service commitments and system requirements made by the service organization influ-
ence which trust services categories the service organization selects for the SOC 2 examina-
tion. For example, a cloud service provider may choose to include the availability category 
because of its importance to a broad range of users. Users may find a brief discussion of how 
the principal service commitments and system requirements relate to the categories selected 
for the examination useful..  
 
Service commitments. Service commitments may be communicated to user entities in many 
ways, such as through contracts, service-level agreements, and published policies (for exam-
ple, a privacy policy). No specific form of communication is required.  
A service organization may make service commitments on many different aspects of the ser-
vice being described, including the following: 
• Specification of the algorithm used in a calculation 


 
Page 12 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
• The hours a system will be available 
• Published password standards 
• Encryption standards used to encrypt stored customer data 
Service commitments may also be made about one or more of the trust services categories 
addressed by the description. As an example, if controls over privacy are addressed by the 
description, a service organization may make commitments such as the following:  
• The organization will not process or transfer information without obtaining the data 
subject’s consent. 
• The organization will provide a privacy notice to customers once every six months or 
when there is a change in the organization’s business policies. 
• The organization will respond to access requests within 10 working days of receiving 
the request from its customers.  
System requirements. System requirements are the specifications about how the system 
should function to do the following:  
• Meet the service organization’s service commitments to user entities and others (such as 
user entities’ customers) 
• Meet the service organization’s commitments to vendors and business partners 
• Support compliance with relevant laws, regulations, and guidelines of industry groups, 
such as business or trade associations 


 
Page 13 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
• Achieve other objectives of the service organization that are relevant to the trust ser-
vices categories addressed by the description, including those relating to implementa-
tion of controls to meet the requirements of a process or control framework   
System requirements are often specified in the service organization’s system policies and 
procedures, system design documentation, contracts with customers, and government regula-
tions. The following are examples of system requirements:  
• Workforce member fingerprinting and background checks established in government 
banking regulations 
• System edits that restrict the values accepted for system input, which are defined in ap-
plication design documents 
• Maximum acceptable intervals between periodic review of workforce member logical 
access as documented in the security policy manual 
• Data definition and tagging standards, including any associated metadata requirements, 
established by industry groups or other bodies, such as the Simple Object Access Proto-
col (SOAP) 
• Business processing rules and standards established by regulators, for example, security 
requirements under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
• Programmatic enforcement of segregation of duties between data entry and data ap-
proval that creates system requirements regarding user access administration 
Determining principal service commitments and system requirements. Although service 
organization management is responsible for designing, implementing, and operating controls 
to provide reasonable assurance that it achieves its service commitments and system require-
ments, management is required to disclose in the description only its principal service com-
mitments and principal system requirements.  


 
Page 14 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
Principal service commitments are those that support the understanding of the services pro-
vided, the system, and the design and operation of controls by a broad range of SOC 2 report 
users.  
• When a service organization makes the same system availability commitment to the ma-
jority of its user entities, it is likely that management would disclose such commitments 
in the description because such information would support the understanding of a broad 
range of SOC 2 report users.  
When a service organization makes specific commitments about system availability to one or 
a small subset of user entities, management may decide to omit such commitments from the 
description because they are unlikely to support the understanding of a broad range of SOC 2 
report users. In this situation, it is up to the individual user entity or entities to obtain addi-
tional information from the service organization regarding the achievement of specific availa-
bility commitments. 
Principal system requirements are those that are relevant to the trust services category or cat-
egories addressed by the description and that are likely to be relevant to the broad range of 
SOC 2 report users. In identifying which system requirements to disclose, service organiza-
tion management may consider internal policies that are relevant to the system being de-
scribed, key decisions made in the design and operation of the system, and other business re-
quirements for the system. For example, internal requirements related to the operating margin 
for the services associated with the system are not relevant to the broad range of SOC 2 re-
port users and therefore need not be disclosed.  
When the description addresses privacy, service organization management is likely to iden-
tify the relevant service commitments and system requirements identified in the service or-
ganization’s privacy notice or in its privacy policy as part of its principal service commit-
ments and system requirements.  
DC3: The components of the system used to pro-
vide the services, including the following: 
a. Infrastructure 
Infrastructure. Disclosures about the infrastructure component include matters such as the 
collection of physical or virtual resources that supports an overall IT environment, including 
the physical environment and related structures, IT, and related hardware (for example, 


 
Page 15 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
b. Software 
c. People 
d. Procedures 
e. Data 
facilities, servers, storage, environmental monitoring equipment, data storage devices and 
media, mobile devices, and internal networks and connected external telecommunications 
networks) that the service organization uses to provide the services. As an example, a cloud 
software-as-a-service provider’s infrastructure disclosure is likely to include information 
about its implementation of virtual system components provided by an infrastructure or host-
ing service provider.  
System components may be described using specific technical terms that will help create a 
clearer understanding of the service organization’s system and system boundaries. Technical 
terms can also aid report users in understanding the service organization’s physical and logi-
cal components when considering a service organization’s impact on the user entities. It may 
be helpful for service organizations to enhance their system descriptions using open systems 
interconnect (OSI) seven-layer model concepts. A service organization could describe how 
and on which layer specific components of the system operate, for example, with a statement 
such as this: 
Encrypted connections are made to the service organization using client virtual private 
network (VPN) hardware that connects system users via secure shell (SSH) to secure file 
transfer protocol (SFTP) servers that operate following transport layer security (TLS) 
standards and protocols. 
Software. Disclosures about the software component include matters such as the application 
programs, the IT system software that supports those application programs (operating sys-
tems, middleware, and utilities), the types of databases used, the nature of external-facing 
web applications, and the nature of applications developed in-house, including details about 
whether the applications in use are mobile applications or desktop and laptop applications.  
People. Disclosures about the people component include information about the personnel in-
volved in governance, management, operations, and security, as well as information about 
the users of the system (business unit personnel, developers, operators, user entity personnel, 
vendor personnel, and managers). Among other things, such disclosures may include an 
overview of the individuals responsible for evaluating and managing controls and other activ-
ities that prevent, detect, mitigate, and remediate system incidents.    


 
Page 16 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
Procedures. Disclosures about the automated and manual procedures implemented by the 
service organization primarily relate to those through which services are provided. These in-
clude, as appropriate, procedures through which service activities are initiated, authorized, 
performed, and delivered and through which reports and other information are prepared.  
A process consists of a series of linked procedures designed to accomplish a particular goal 
(for example, the process for managing third-party risks). Procedures are the specific actions 
undertaken to implement a process (for example, the procedure in place to assess and manage 
the requisition and engagement of vendors). For that reason, service organization manage-
ment may find it easier to describe procedures in the context of the process of which they are 
a part.  
Procedures are typically developed based on policies. Policies are management or board 
member statements of what should be done to effect control. Such statements may be docu-
mented, explicitly stated in communications, or implied through actions and decisions. The 
service organization deploys control activities through policies that establish what is ex-
pected and procedures that put policies into action. 
Disclosures may include an overview of significant processes relevant to the services pro-
vided, whereas the detailed procedures performed may be disclosed in a separate section of 
the description. Reports and other information prepared by the service organization may also 
be included in the description to enable report users to better understand the order of activi-
ties performed by the service organization.  
Data. Disclosures about the data component include types of data used by the system, trans-
action streams, files, databases, tables, and output used or processed by the system. Such dis-
closures would generally focus on customer data transmitted through the system or residing 
in the system, as well as any other data that directly supports the system.  
Data usually includes sensitive information, which may vary from organization to organiza-
tion. Sensitive information may include transaction data, regulatory compliance information, 
financial information used for both internal and external reporting purposes, confidential 
sales information, confidential wholesale pricing information and order information, new de-
sign ideas and branding strategies, and proprietary information provided by business part-
ners. Sensitive information also includes personal information. 


 
Page 17 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
When sensitive information is transmitted through or resides in the system used to provide 
services to users, the description may address the confidentiality or privacy categories. In that 
case, the description may also address the following other matters about the data component:  
• The principal types of data created, collected, processed, transmitted, used, or stored by 
the service organization and the methods used to collect, retain, disclose, dispose of, or 
anonymize the data  
• Personal information that warrants security, data protection, or breach disclosures based 
on laws or commitments (for example, personally identifiable information, protected 
health information, and payment card data) 
• Third-party entity information (for example, information subject to confidentiality re-
quirements in contracts) that warrants security, data protection, or breach disclosures 
based on laws or commitments 
For each system component, such disclosures would generally address aspects of confidential 
and personal information used in providing the service within well-defined processes and in-
formal ad hoc procedures. 
Boundaries of the system. The description should clearly identify the system that is the focus 
of the SOC 2 examination. In some situations, however, it is not always clear whether a spe-
cific activity or function performed at the service organization is part of the system being de-
scribed. Determining the functions or processes that are outside the boundaries of the system 
and describing them in the description may be necessary to prevent report users from misun-
derstanding the boundaries of the system. Therefore, if there is a risk that report users might 
be confused about whether a specific function or process is part of the system being de-
scribed, the description needs to clearly identify which processes or functions are outside the 
boundaries of the system being described.   
For example, the following functions or processes at the service organization may be outside 
the boundaries of the system being described: 


 
Page 18 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
• The process used to invoice user entities for the services provided by the service organi-
zation. 
• The conversion of new user entities to the service organization’s systems. For some ser-
vice organizations, such conversions are handled by an entirely different system than 
the one being described.  
• The receipt of data from sources outside the system being described. An example is a 
payroll processing system that receives information inputs from an employer in a ready-
to-process state, which limits the responsibility of the service organization’s system to 
processing the inputs provided by the employer to produce direct bank deposits to speci-
fied bank accounts. 
Service organizations frequently use a variety of applications or software tools to assist with 
the operation of certain aspects of their controls. Applications or software tools that support 
the service organization in achieving its service commitments and system requirements are 
likely to be within the boundaries of the system. Examples of applications or software tools 
that can help with the operation of controls include tools that help with the identification or 
detection of threats and vulnerabilities (for example, firewalls, intrusion prevention systems 
[IPSs], intrusion detection systems [IDSs], security information and event management sys-
tems [SIEMs]), monitoring the implementation of key software settings, or monitoring the 
effectiveness of automated controls. When such applications or software tools are used, it 
may be useful for the description to include appropriate disclosures about those applications 
or software tools.  
Third-party access. Vendors, business partners, and others (third parties) often store, process, 
and transmit sensitive data; third parties may also have access to a service organization’s sys-
tem. In some situations, these third parties may perform functions or activities within one or 
more components of the system. Disclosures about third-party access may include matters 
such as the nature of third parties’ access and connectivity to the service organization’s sys-
tem and a description of the functions or activities performed by such third parties. Disclo-
sures may also include the controls implemented and activities performed by service 


 
Page 19 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
organization management to monitor the risks of doing business with vendors and other third 
parties, particularly when such activities are significant to the achievement of the service or-
ganization’s service commitments and system requirements.  
DC4: For identified system incidents that (a) were 
the result of controls that were not suitably de-
signed or operating effectively or (b) otherwise re-
sulted in a significant failure in the achievement of 
one or more of those service commitments and sys-
tem requirements, as of the date of the description 
(for a type 1) or during the period of time covered 
by the description (for a type 2), as applicable, the 
following information: 
a. 
Nature of each incident 
b. 
Timing surrounding the incident 
c. 
Extent (or effect) of the incident and its 
disposition 
• Judgment is needed when determining whether to disclose an incident. Such judg-
ments may be informed by consideration of whether the system resulted from one or 
more controls that were not suitably designed or operating effectively.  
• in a significant change to the service organization’s controls to detect, prevent, miti-
gate, remediate, or recover from system incidents.  
• in a significant failure in the achievement of one or more of the service organization’s 
service commitments and system requirements. 
• in public disclosure due to the requirement of a law or regulation.  
• in a material effect on the service organization’s financial position or results of opera-
tions and required disclosure in a financial statement filing. 
• in the imposition of fines or sanctions by any legal or regulatory agency. 
• in the service organization’s withdrawal from material markets or cancellation of ma-
terial contracts. 
• in the theft, alteration, or unauthorized use of sensitive information, including proprie-
tary information, personally identifiable information, or personal health information. 
• in a demand for payment in order to restore encrypted information or to prevent the 
inappropriate disclosure of stolen information. 
• in the general public’s knowledge of the system incident.  


 
Page 20 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
If an incident affected service organization technology, processes, or systems that are not in-
cluded in the description, management may consider whether the incident resulted from inef-
fective controls shared among all the service organization’s systems. In that case, manage-
ment may need to consider whether there are controls in place, such as segmentation between 
systems, to prevent a similar breach from occurring in the system being described. If shared 
controls are ineffective or there are no additional controls to prevent a similar breach in the 
system being described, management would be more likely to disclose the incident. 
Disclosures about identified security incidents are not intended to be made at a detailed level, 
which might increase the likelihood that a hostile party could exploit a security vulnerability, 
thereby compromising the service organization’s ability to achieve its service commitments 
and system requirements. Rather, the disclosures are intended to enable report users to under-
stand the nature of the risks faced by the service organization and the impact of the realiza-
tion of those risks. 
Assume that the service organization identified a security breach that resulted in the service 
organization’s failure to achieve one or more of its service commitments and system require-
ments. The breach, which occurred six months prior to the start of the period covered by the 
description, had not been fully remediated during the period covered by the description. In 
this example, management would likely need to disclose the incident in the description to en-
able report users to understand the nature of the risks faced by the service organization and 
the impact of the realization of those risks. In addition, service organization management 
should consider whether to disclose known incidents at a subservice organization, regardless 
of whether management has elected to use the inclusive or carve-out method. 
If there have been no significant incidents that require disclosure, management may disclose 
that fact in the description.  


 
Page 21 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
DC5: The applicable trust services criteria and the 
related controls designed to provide reasonable as-
surance that the service organization’s service 
commitments and system requirements were 
achieved 
TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, 
Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Revised Points of Focus — 2022),fn 11 presents the criteria 
for each of the trust services categories. The description should include information about 
each of the criteria related to the trust services category or categories covered by the descrip-
tion (applicable trust services criteria). Additionally, for each of the applicable trust services 
criteria, the description would include information about the controls designed and imple-
mented to achieve the related service commitments and system requirements based on the 
trust services criteria. For example, if the description addresses availability, information 
about controls implemented by the service organization to address the common criteria in the 
trust services criteria and the additional trust services criteria for availability would be in-
cluded in the description. 
 
When the service organization discloses a principal service commitment regarding the imple-
mentation of controls to meet the requirements of a process or control framework, users 
would generally expect the description to include information about how the service organi-
zation’s implemented controls met those requirements.  
 
Risks that threaten the achievement of service commitments and system requirements. Be-
cause risk assessment is critical to the design and implementation of controls to mitigate 
those risks, users may find disclosures about the service organization’s risk assessment pro-
cess particularly helpful. In addition to a description of its risk assessment process, useful 
disclosures may include the following: 
• Risks that may have a significant effect on the service organization’s ability to 
achieve its service commitments and system requirements.  
• Whether any aspect of risk assessment is performed by third parties  
 
fn 11 TSP section 100 can be found in AICPA Trust Services Criteria. 


 
Page 22 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
• The process for addressing risks introduced by use of subservice organizations or 
other third parties, including those that have access to customer and employee data 
 
 
DC6: If service organization management as-
sumed, in the design of the service organization’s 
system, that certain controls would be imple-
mented by user entities, and those controls are nec-
essary, in combination with controls at the service 
Complementary user entity controls (CUECs). CUECs are those controls that service organi-
zation management assumed, in the design of the system, would be implemented by user en-
tities and that are necessary, in combination with controls at the service organization, to pro-
vide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commitments and system 
requirements would be achieved. 


 
Page 23 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
organization, to provide reasonable assurance that 
the service organization’s service commitments 
and system requirements would be achieved, those 
complementary user entity controls (CUECs) 
Usually, a service organization restricts its service commitments to matters for which it is re-
sponsible and that it can reasonably achieve by itself. In that case, the service organization 
can achieve its service commitments and system requirements without depending on the im-
plementation of CUECs at user entities. Similarly, system requirements are generally derived 
from those commitments. Consider trust services criterion CC6.2:  
Prior to issuing system credentials and granting system access, the entity registers and au-
thorizes new internal and external users whose access is administered by the entity. For 
those users whose access is administered by the entity, user system credentials are re-
moved when user access is no longer authorized.  
CC6.2 requires only that the service organization register a system user (identified by the 
user entity as an authorized user) and issue system credentials to that user after the user entity 
supplies the service organization with a list of authorized users. The user entity is responsible 
for identifying the users and supplying the service organization with a list of authorized us-
ers. If the user entity provides a list and inadvertently includes employees who should not be 
granted access, the service organization has still met both trust services criterion CC6.2 and 
its service commitment to the user entity. Accordingly, identifying authorized users and com-
municating that information to the service organization are not considered CUECs. 
The description is presented in accordance with this criterion if the CUECs are complete, ac-
curately described, and relevant to the service organization’s achievement of its service com-
mitments and system requirements.  
User entity responsibilities. In addition to CUECs, user entities may have other responsibili-
ties when using the system. Those responsibilities are necessary for the user entity to derive 
the intended benefits of using the services of the service organization. For example, the user 
of an express delivery service is responsible for providing complete and accurate recipient 
information and for using appropriate packaging materials. Such responsibilities are referred 
to as user entity responsibilities.  
Trust services criterion CC2.3 states, “the entity communicates with external parties regard-
ing matters affecting the functioning of internal control.” This would include communication 
of user entity responsibilities. However, because user entity responsibilities can be volumi-
nous, they are often communicated through other methods (for example, by describing them 


 
Page 24 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
in user manuals). Consequently, disclosure of user entity responsibilities in the description is 
usually not practical. Instead, management ordinarily identifies in the description only the 
types of communications it makes to external users about user entity responsibilities. Deter-
mining the form and content of such communication is the responsibility of service organiza-
tion management. 
When service organization management communicates user entity responsibilities only to 
specific parties (such as in contracts with user entities), management considers whether other 
intended users of the SOC 2 report are likely to misunderstand it; if misunderstanding is 
likely, management should limit the distribution of the SOC 2 report to those specific parties. 
If service organization management does not want to limit the distribution of the report, man-
agement would include the significant user entity responsibilities in the description of the 
system to prevent users from misunderstanding the system and the service auditor’s report. In 
that case, the report would be appropriate for the broad range of SOC 2 users.  
 
DC7: If the service organization uses a subservice 
organization fn 11 and the controls at the subservice 
organization are necessary, in combination with 
controls at the service organization, to provide rea-
sonable assurance that the service organization’s 
service commitments and system requirements are 
achieved, the following: 
a. When service organization management 
elects to use the inclusive method: 
i. The nature of the service provided by 
the subservice organization 
ii. The controls at the subservice organi-
zation that are necessary, in combina-
tion with controls at the service or-
ganization to provide reasonable 
Inclusive method. When service organization management elects the inclusive method, the 
relevant aspects of the subservice organization’s infrastructure, software, people, procedures, 
and data are considered part of the service organization’s system and are included in the de-
scription of the service organization’s system. Although the relevant aspects are considered a 
part of the service organization’s system, the portions of the system, and related system con-
trols, that are attributable to the subservice organization would be separately identified in the 
description. Such disclosures include the aspects of the internal control components relevant 
to identification and assessment of risks that would prevent the service organization from 
achieving its service commitments and system requirements and the design, implementation, 
and operation of controls to mitigate those risks.  
Carve-out method. When service organization management elects the carve-out method, dis-
closure of the identity of the subservice organization may be useful to user entities or busi-
ness partners who want to obtain information about and perform procedures related to the 
services provided by the subservice organization. 


 
Page 25 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
assurance that the service organiza-
tion’s service commitments and sys-
tem requirements are achieved  
iii. Relevant aspects of the subservice or-
ganization’s infrastructure, software, 
people, procedures, and data 
iv. The portions of the system that are at-
tributable to the subservice organiza-
tion 
b. When service organization management de-
cides to use the carve-out method: 
i. The nature of the service provided by 
the subservice organization  
ii. Each of the applicable trust services 
criteria that are intended to be met by 
controls at the subservice organiza-
tion 
iii. The types of controls that service or-
ganization management assumed, in 
the design of the service organiza-
tion’s system, would be implemented 
by the subservice organization that 
are necessary, in combination with 
controls at the service organization, to 
provide reasonable assurance that the 
service organization’s service com-
mitments and system requirements 
are achieved (commonly referred to 
Complementary subservice organization controls (CSOCs) are controls that service organiza-
tion management assumed, in the design of the system, would be implemented by subservice 
organizations and are necessary, in combination with controls at the service organization to 
provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commitments and system 
requirements would be achieved. When using the carve-out method, the description would 
identify the broad category of CSOCs or the types of individual controls that the subservice 
organization is assumed to have implemented. To be meaningful to report users, only CSOCs 
that are specific to the services provided by the system should be described.  
It is important that the subservice organization’s responsibilities for implementing those 
CSOCs are included in the description; it is also important that the description indicates that 
the related service commitments and system requirements can be achieved only if the CSOCs 
are suitably designed and operating effectively during the period addressed by the descrip-
tion.  
The description may also include disclosures that identify those instances in which the ser-
vice organization achieves its service commitments and system requirements solely by the 
operation of service organization controls and those instances in which a combination of con-
trols at the service organization and CSOCs are necessary to provide reasonable assurance 
that the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements were achieved. 
Examples of CSOCs include the following: 
• Controls relevant to the completeness and accuracy of transaction processing on behalf 
of the service organization 
• Controls relevant to the completeness and accuracy of specified reports provided to and 
used by the service organization 
• Logical access controls relevant to the processing performed for the service organization 
• Controls over the procedures to detect and respond to potential system incidents 


 
Page 26 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
as complementary subservice organi-
zation controls or CSOCs)  
• The processes in place to communicate significant system incidents and deviations in 
the effectiveness of controls to service organization management 
• The risk assessment process and the policies and procedures implemented to mitigate 
those risks 
• Activities such as internal audit procedures or quality control reviews that the subservice 
organization has in place to monitor the effectiveness of its control activities 
The description is presented in accordance with this criterion if the CSOCs are complete, ac-
curately described, and relevant to the service organization’s achievement of the service com-
mitments and system requirements related to the system being described.  
Other matters. A service organization that uses multiple subservice organizations may pre-
pare its description using the carve-out method for one or more subservice organizations and 
the inclusive method for others. 
Regardless of the method service organization management selects, the description would 
disclose controls designed to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s ser-
vice commitments and system requirements are achieved, which include controls that the ser-
vice organization uses to monitor the services provided by the subservice organization. Such 
monitoring controls may include a combination of the following: 
• Testing of controls at the subservice organization by members of the service organiza-
tion’s internal audit function 
• Reviewing and reconciling output reports 
• Holding periodic discussions with the subservice organization personnel and evaluating 
subservice organization performance against established service-level objectives and 
agreements 
• Making site visits to the subservice organization 


 
Page 27 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
• Inspecting type 2 SOC 2 reports on the subservice organization’s system 
• Monitoring external communications, such as complaints from user entities relevant to 
the services performed by the subservice organization 
 
DC8: Any specific criterion of the applicable trust 
services criteria that is not relevant to the system 
and the reasons it is not relevant  
If one or more applicable trust services criteria are not relevant to the system being described, 
service organization management includes in the description an explanation of why such cri-
teria are not relevant. For example, an applicable trust services criterion may not be relevant 
if it does not apply to the services provided by the service organization. 
Assume user entities — not the service organization — collect personal information from the 
user entities’ customers. When the description addresses controls over privacy, service organ-
ization management would not disclose in its description the user entities’ controls over col-
lection; however, the reason for that omission would be disclosed. In contrast, the existence 
of a policy prohibiting certain activities is not sufficient to render a criterion not applicable. 
For example, when the description addresses controls over privacy, it would be inappropriate 
for service organization management to omit from the description disclosures of personal in-
formation to third parties based only on the fact that the service organization’s policies forbid 
such disclosures. Instead, the description would describe the policies and related controls for 
preventing or detecting such disclosures. 
If a criterion is relevant to the services provided, it is relevant even if all components of the 
system used to provide the related aspect of the services have been outsourced to a subservice 
organization. For example, a service organization uses an infrastructure-as-a-service cloud 
provider for all IT systems related to the services provided. The subservice organization is 
responsible for deleting information from its hosting environment before ending logical and 
physical access of storage devices. Because the service organization still has a contractual 
commitment to protect the information of its customers, CC6.5, The entity discontinues logi-
cal and physical protections over physical assets only after the ability to read or recover 


 
Page 28 
Description Criteria fn 10 
Implementation Guidance 
data and software from those assets has been diminished and is no longer required to meet 
the entity’s objectives, is still relevant, even if the subservice organization is carved out. 
The description may also include a disclosure that all the trust services criteria for the cate-
gory or categories addressed by the description are relevant to the system.  
DC9: In a description that covers a period of time 
(type 2 examination), the relevant details of signifi-
cant changes to the service organization’s system 
and controls during that period that are relevant to 
the service organization’s service commitments 
and system requirements 
Significant changes to be disclosed consist of those that are likely to be relevant to the broad 
range of report users. Disclosure of such changes is expected to include an appropriate level 
of detail, such as the date the changes occurred and how the system differed before and after 
the changes. 
Examples of significant changes to a system include the following: 
• Changes to the services provided  
• Significant changes to IT and security personnel 
• Significant changes to system processes, IT architecture and applications, and the pro-
cesses and system used by subservice organizations 
• Changes to legal and regulatory requirements that could affect system requirements 
• Changes to organizational structure resulting in a change to internal control over the sys-
tem (for example, a change to the legal entity) 
The description may also include a statement that there were no significant changes to the 
system that are relevant to the service organization’s service commitments and system re-
quirements.   


 
Page 29 
Appendix — Glossary 
.20 
For purposes of this document, the following terms have the meanings attributed as follows: 
applicable trust services criteria. The criteria codified in TSP section 100, 2017 Trust Services 
Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy (With Re-
vised Points of Focus – 2022), used to evaluate controls relevant to the trust services category or 
categories included within the scope of a particular examination. 
board or board of directors. Individuals with responsibility for overseeing the strategic direction of 
the service organization and the obligations related to the accountability of the service organiza-
tion. Depending on the nature of the service organization, such responsibilities may be held by a 
board of directors or supervisory board for a corporation, a board of trustees for a not-for-profit 
service organization, a board of governors or commissioners for a government service organiza-
tion, general partners for a partnership, or an owner for a small business. 
boundaries of the system (or system boundaries). The boundaries of a system are the specific as-
pects of a service organization’s infrastructure, software, people, procedures, and data necessary 
to provide its services. When systems for multiple services share aspects, infrastructure, soft-
ware, people, procedures, and data, the systems will overlap, but the boundaries of each system 
will differ. In a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the confidentiality and privacy criteria, the 
system boundaries cover, at a minimum, all the system components as they relate to the life cycle 
of the confidential and personal information within well-defined processes and informal ad hoc 
procedures. 
business partner. An individual or business (and its employees), other than a vendor, that has some 
degree of involvement with the service organization’s business dealings or agrees to cooperate, 
to any degree, with the service organization (for example, a computer manufacturer who works 
with another company that supplies it with parts). 
carve-out method. Method of addressing the services provided by a subservice organization in 
which the components of the subservice organization’s system used to provide the services to the 
service organization are excluded from the description of the service organization’s system and 
from the scope of the examination. However, the description identifies (1) the nature of the ser-
vices performed by the subservice organization; (2) the types of controls expected to be per-
formed at the subservice organization that are necessary, in combination with controls at the ser-
vice organization, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service com-
mitments and system requirements were achieved; and (3) the controls at the service organiza-
tion used to monitor the effectiveness of the subservice organization’s controls. 
complementary subservice organization controls. Controls that service organization management 
assumed, in the design of the service organization’s system, would be implemented by the sub-
service organization that are necessary, in combination with controls at the service organization, 
to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commitments and system 
requirements are achieved. 


 
Page 30 
complementary user entity controls. Controls that service organization management assumed, in 
the design of the service organization’s system, would be implemented by user entities and are 
necessary, in combination with controls at the service organization, to provide reasonable assur-
ance that the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements would be 
achieved. 
controls at a service organization. The policies and procedures at a service organization that are 
part of the service organization’s system of internal control. Controls exist within each of the five 
COSO internal control components: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, in-
formation and communication, and monitoring. The objective of a service organization’s system 
of internal control is to provide reasonable assurance that its service commitments and system 
requirements are achieved. 
controls at a subservice organization. The policies and procedures at a subservice organization that 
are relevant to the service organization’s achievement of its service commitments and system 
requirements.  
criteria. The benchmarks used to measure or evaluate the subject matter.  
data controller. An organization that (alone or jointly with others) determines the purposes for and 
the means by which personal data is processed.   
data processor. An organization that processes personal data at the direction of a data controller. In 
many cases, a service organization may process personal data for its business-to-business (B2B) 
customers (user entities), which in turn may function as data controllers. In other cases, a service 
organization may function as a data controller, depending on the facts and circumstances.  
external users. Users, other than entity personnel, who are authorized by entity management, cus-
tomers, or other authorized persons to interact with the entity’s information system.  
inclusive method. Method of addressing the services provided by a subservice organization in 
which the description of the service organization’s system includes a description of the (a) the 
nature of the services provided by the subservice organization and (b) the components of the sub-
service organization’s system used to provide services to the service organization, including the 
subservice organization’s controls that are necessary, in combination with controls at the service 
organization, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commit-
ments and system requirements were achieved. (When using the inclusive method, controls at the 
subservice organization are subject to the service auditor’s examination procedures. Because the 
subservice organization’s system components are included in the description, those components 
are included in the scope of the examination.) 
information life cycle. The collection, use, retention, disclosure, disposal, or anonymization of con-
fidential or personal information within well-defined processes and informal ad hoc procedures. 
intended users. Individuals or entities that the service organization intends will be report users.  


 
Page 31 
internal control. A process, effected by a service organization’s board of directors, management, 
and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of ob-
jectives relating to operations, reporting, and compliance. 
operating effectiveness (or controls that are operating effectively). Controls that operate effec-
tively provide reasonable assurance of achieving the service organization’s service commitments 
and system requirements based on the applicable trust services criteria. 
personal information. Information that is about, or can be related to, an identifiable individual.  
policies. Management or board member statements of what should be done to effect control. Such 
statements may be documented, explicitly stated in communications, or implied through actions 
and decisions. Policies serve as the basis for procedures. 
process or control framework. A framework that contains a set of processes or controls, estab-
lished by another party, that organizations are expected to implement in support of establishing 
an effective system of internal control. These frameworks are usually developed by an industry 
group, regulator, governmental entity, standard-setting body, or other organization (collectively 
referred to as sponsoring organizations) to obtain information from organizations with which 
they do business about their processes or controls. The most common types of process or control 
frameworks relate to security and privacy.   
privacy notice. A written communication by entities that collect personal information, to the indi-
viduals about whom personal information is collected, about the entity’s (a) policies regarding 
the nature of the information that they will collect and how that information will be used, re-
tained, disclosed, and disposed of or anonymized and (b) commitment to adhere to those poli-
cies. A privacy notice also includes information about such matters as the purpose of collecting 
the information, the choices that individuals have related to their personal information, the secu-
rity of such information, and how individuals can contact the entity with inquiries, complaints, 
and disputes related to their personal information. When a user entity collects personal infor-
mation from individuals, it typically provides a privacy notice to those individuals. 
report users (specified users or specified parties) of a SOC 2 report. In this document, the term 
refers to users of a SOC 2 report. The service auditor’s report included in a SOC 2 report ordi-
narily includes an alert restricting the use of the report to specified parties who possess sufficient 
knowledge and understanding of the service organization and the system to understand the re-
port. The expected knowledge is likely to include an understanding of the following matters:  
• The nature of the service provided by the service organization 
• How the service organization’s system interacts with user entities, business partners, sub-
service organizations, and other parties 
• Internal control and its limitations 


 
Page 32 
• Complementary user entity controls and complementary subservice organization controls 
and how those controls interact with the controls at the service organization to achieve 
the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements 
• User entity responsibilities and how they may affect the user entity’s ability to effectively 
use the service organization’s services 
• The applicable trust services criteria 
• The risks that may threaten the achievement of the service organization’s service commit-
ments and system requirements and how controls address those risks 
Users likely to possess such knowledge include user entities and their personnel, business part-
ners and their personnel, practitioners providing services to such user entities and business part-
ners, prospective user entities and business partners, and regulators who understand how the ser-
vice organization’s system may be used to provide the services.  
sensitive information. Sensitive information varies from organization to organization but often in-
cludes nonpublic information such as the following: regulatory compliance information; finan-
cial information used for both internal and external reporting purposes; confidential sales infor-
mation, including customer lists; confidential wholesale pricing information and order infor-
mation; confidential product information, including product specifications, new design ideas, and 
branding strategies; and proprietary information provided by business partners, including manu-
facturing data, sales and pricing information, and licensed designs. Sensitive information also 
includes personal information. 
service auditor. As used in this document, a CPA who performs a SOC 2 examination of controls 
within a service organization’s system relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, con-
fidentiality, or privacy.  
service commitments. Declarations made by service organization management to user entities and 
others (such as user entities’ customers) about the system used to provide the service. Service 
commitments can be communicated in written individualized agreements, standardized contracts, 
service-level agreements, or published statements (for example, in a security practices state-
ment).  
service organization. An organization, or segment of an organization, that provides services to user 
entities. 
SOC 2 examination. An examination engagement to report on whether (a) the description of the 
service organization’s system is in accordance with the description criteria, (b) the controls were 
suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commit-
ments and system requirements were achieved based on the applicable trust services criteria, and 
(c) in a type 2 report, the controls operated effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the 
service organization’s service commitments and system requirements were achieved based on 
the applicable trust services criteria. The SOC 2 examination is performed in accordance with the 
attestation standards and AICPA Guide SOC 2® Reporting on an Examination of Controls at a 


 
Page 33 
Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or 
Privacy.  
subsequent events. Events or transactions that occur after the specified period covered by the en-
gagement, but prior to the date of the service auditor’s report, which could have a significant ef-
fect on the evaluation of the presentation of the description of the service organization’s system 
or the evaluation of the suitability of design and operating effectiveness of controls. 
subservice organization. A vendor used by a service organization that performs controls that are 
necessary, in combination with controls at the service organization, to provide reasonable assur-
ance that the service organization’s service commitments and system requirements were 
achieved.  
suitability of design (or suitably designed controls). Controls are suitably designed if they have 
the potential to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service commit-
ments and system requirements would be achieved. Suitably designed controls are operated as 
designed by persons who have the necessary authority and competence to perform the control.  
system. Refers to the infrastructure, software, procedures, and data that are designed, implemented, 
and operated by people to achieve one or more of the organization’s specific business objectives 
(for example, delivery of services or production of goods) in accordance with management-spec-
ified requirements. 
system components. Refers to the individual elements of a system, which may be classified into the 
following five categories: infrastructure, software, people, procedures, and data. 
system event. An occurrence that could lead to the loss of, or disruption to, operations, services, or 
functions and could result in a service organization’s failure to achieve its service commitments 
or system requirements. Such an occurrence may arise from actual or attempted unauthorized 
access or use by internal or external parties and (a) impair (or potentially impair) the availability, 
integrity, or confidentiality of information or systems; (b) result in unauthorized disclosure or 
theft of information or other assets or the destruction or corruption of data; or (c) cause damage 
to systems. Such occurrences also may arise from the failure of the system to process data as de-
signed or from the loss, corruption, or destruction of data used by the system. 
system incident. A system event that requires action on the part of service organization management 
to prevent or reduce the impact of the event on the service organization’s achievement of its ser-
vice commitments and system requirements.  
system requirements. Specifications regarding how the system should function to (a) meet the ser-
vice organization’s service commitments to user entities and others (such as user entities’ cus-
tomers); (b) meet the service organization’s commitments to vendors and business partners; (c) 
comply with relevant laws and regulations and guidelines of industry groups, such as business or 
trade associations; and (d) achieve other objectives of the service organization that are relevant to 
the trust services category or categories addressed by the description. Requirements are often 
specified in the service organization’s system policies and procedures, system design documenta-
tion, contracts with customers, and government regulations. 


 
Page 34 
user entity. An entity that uses the services provided by a service organization. 
vendor. An individual or business (and its employees) engaged to provide services to the service 
organization. Depending on the services a vendor provides (for example, if it operates certain 
controls on behalf of the service organization that are necessary, in combination with the service 
organization’s controls, to provide reasonable assurance that the service organization’s service 
commitments and system requirements were achieved), a vendor might also be a subservice or-
ganization.  
 


© 2024 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. All rights reserved. AICPA and American Institute of CPAs are trademarks of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and are 
registered in the US, the EU and other countries. SOC 1®, SOC 2® and SOC 3® trademarks are registered trademarks of the AICPA. The Globe Design is a trademark of the Association of International 
Certified Professional Accountants and licensed to the AICPA. 2403-036908
